

===== PAGE 1 =====
sensors
Article
Real-Time Smart-Digital Stethoscope System
for Heart Diseases Monitoring
Muhammad E.H. Chowdhury1,*
, Amith Khandakar1
, Khawla Alzoubi1, Samar Mansoor1,
Anas M. Tahir1, Mamun Bin Ibne Reaz2and Nasser Al-Emadi1
1Department of Electrical Engineering, College of Engineering, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar;
amitk@qu.edu.qa (A.K.); kalzoubi@qu.edu.qa (K.A.); sm1204406@student.qu.edu.qa (S.M.);
a.tahir@qu.edu.qa (A.M.T.); alemadin@qu.edu.qa (N.A.-E.)
2Department of Electrical, Electronic & Systems Engineering, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi,
Selangor 43600, Malaysia; mamun@ukm.edu.my
*Correspondence: mchowdhury@qu.edu.qa; Tel.: +974-4403-7382
Received: 28 April 2019; Accepted: 4 June 2019; Published: 20 June 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: One of the major causes of death all over the world is heart disease or cardiac dysfunction.
These diseases could be identiﬁed easily with the variations in the sound produced due to the heart
activity. These sophisticated auscultations need important clinical experience and concentrated
listening skills. Therefore, there is an unmet need for a portable system for the early detection of cardiac
illnesses. This paper proposes a prototype model of a smart digital-stethoscope system to monitor
patient’s heart sounds and diagnose any abnormality in a real-time manner. This system consists of
two subsystems that communicate wirelessly using Bluetooth low energy technology: A portable
digital stethoscope subsystem, and a computer-based decision-making subsystem. The portable
subsystem captures the heart sounds of the patient, ﬁlters and digitizes, and sends the captured heart
sounds to a personal computer wirelessly to visualize the heart sounds and for further processing
to make a decision if the heart sounds are normal or abnormal. Twenty-seven t-domain, f-domain,
and Mel frequency cepstral coe cients (MFCC) features were used to train a public database to
identify the best-performing algorithm for classifying abnormal and normal heart sound (HS).
The hyper parameter optimization, along with and without a feature reduction method, was tested
to improve accuracy. The cost-adjusted optimized ensemble algorithm can produce 97% and 88%
accuracy of classifying abnormal and normal HS, respectively.
Keywords: digital stethoscope; heart diseases; heart sound; machine learning; Mel frequency cepstral
coecients (MFCC) features
1. Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is one of the principal causes of human death in all over the world.
Based on the American College of Cardiology, in 2008, over 616,000 persons died of heart disease,
which caused almost 25% of deaths in the US, i.e., one in every four deaths [ 1]. In addition, a study
from the British Heart Foundation stated that heart and circulatory system diseases were the second
most common cause of death in the UK in 2014, with about 155,000 deaths. In 2014, cardiovascular
disease (CVD) caused 27% of all deaths and cancers caused 29% [ 2]. Moreover, CVD is also a major
cause of mortality in Australia, with 45,392 deaths (almost 30% of all deaths) attributed to CVD
in 2015. CVD kills one person in Australia every quarter of an hour [ 3]. The last study that this
was taken into consideration was in the “European CVD Statistics 2017 edition” article [ 4]. CVD
is accountable for more than 3.9 million (45%) death in a year, where 1.8 million are males (40%)
and 2.1 million are females (49%). The electrocardiogram (ECG), being the most popular, inexpensive,
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781; doi:10.3390 /s19122781 www.mdpi.com /journal /sensors


===== PAGE 2 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 2 of 22
non-invasive, and intuitive method of diagnosing heart-related issues, has its limitation when it
comes to detecting structural abnormalities and defects in heart valves due to heart murmurs [ 5].
Other technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which uses radio waves and magnets,
are even capable of capturing moving images of the heart and major blood vessels [ 6]. Echocardiogram
(echo) can also provide detailed anatomy of the human heart using the rebounding wave’s principle.
Another known technology, which uses X-ray imaging, is the computed tomography (CT) scan of
the heart. Recent advancement in 3D and 4D heart model reconstruction using MRI and CT helps
to visualize more than a 2D image [ 7,8]. The major limitation of the above technologies is the use of
complex machines, which are only a ordable by large hospitals, and the World Health Organization
(WHO) reports [ 9] that the majority of cardiovascular disease are su ered by low- and middle-income
countries. In such countries, relying on the above technologies for diagnosing cardiovascular diseases
could be una ordable by the majority of the people in low-income countries for detecting the CVD
in advance.
Understanding the characteristics of the heart sound (HS), also known as heart auscultation,
has been one of the most primitive and popular methods of detecting early cardiac illnesses with
the help of abnormal heart sounds. Phonocardiogram (PCG), also known as heart sound (HS), is a graph
of the HS recording with the help of an equipment called as phonocardiograph [ 10]. There are three
major limitations of the auscultation of the heart: Firstly, requirement of the device to be extremely
sensitive as the sounds are of very low amplitude. Secondly, the low-amplitude HS signal can be easily
corrupted by noise leading to faulty diagnosis. Finally, the reliability of the auscultation technique
mainly depends on the skill, expertise, and capability of hearing of the doctor. Overcoming these
limitations leads to motivation for work in this ﬁeld.
The beating of the heart and the resulting ﬂow of blood through the heart produces HSs. It is
closure of heart valves that produces the normal heart sounds: Mitral and tricuspid valve closure
produces the ﬁrst heart sound (“S1”), and aortic and pulmonic valve closure produces the second
heart sound (“S2”) (Figure 1). Heart valve opening does not normally produce a sound. Also, ﬂow of
blood from one cardiac structure to another is usually laminar and, therefore, silent under normal
conditions. Problems in either heart valves or the heart muscles or both result in abnormal heart
sounds and murmurs. The third HS (S3) (Figure 1) is normally caused by sudden reduction of blood
supply from the left atrium to ventricle. In children and adults (35–40 years), this is normal. However,
in other age groups and especially in the age group more than 40 years, it is abnormal and can be
related to dysfunction or can be related to overloading of ventricles volume [ 11]. The fourth heart
sound (S4) (Figure 1) can be related to failure of heart in the diastolic period. These heart sounds can
be further characterized as the frequency of S1 as it is smaller than S2. The low-pitched sounds S3
and S4 occur 0.1 to 0.2 s after S2 and about 0.07 to 0.1 s before S1. There can be other HSs and heart
murmurs that can be accounted for other cardiovascular issues [11].
The heart sounds S1 and S2 are high-pitched sound and heard well from the diaphragm of
the stethoscope. The normal heart sounds S1 and S2 have frequency ranges of 50–60 Hz and 80–90 Hz,
respectively [ 11]. S3 can be heard during the rush of blood entry to the ventricle from atrium and is
normally a pre-diastolic low-pitched sound. When a failure of the heart is detected, S3 can be referred
to as a bad extrapolative symptom. S3 has a bandwidth of 20–30 Hz [ 11]. The fourth heart sound (S4)
happens at the end of diastole, which is a low-pitched sound and can be well-characterized by the bell
of the stethoscope. S4 is not noticeable during atrial ﬁbrillation or ﬂutter [ 11]. The abnormal S4 has
a frequency range below 20 Hz [11].
With the recent advancement in electronic technology, the digital stethoscope is gaining
popularity day-by-day [ 12]. There are di erent types of digital stethoscopes [ 13–16] that have
been industrialized to replace its analog counterpart. Electronic stethoscopes can provide better
sound quality with variable ampliﬁcation, minimize interference noise, and provide data for
visualization and storage. Electronics stethoscopes still come equipped with connecting cables
between the chest-piece and the head-piece, with the chest-piece having a wireless module to transmit


===== PAGE 3 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 3 of 22
the signal to receivers such as phone, digital audio recorder, or computers for recording and listening
to the sounds [17].
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 21 
 structural abnormalities and defects in heart valves due to heart murmurs [5]. Other technologies 
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which uses radio waves and magnets, are even capable 
of capturing moving images of the heart and major blood vessels [6]. Echocardiogram (echo) can also 
provide detailed anatomy of the human heart using the rebounding wave’s principle. Another 
known technology, which uses X-ray imaging, is the computed tomography (CT) scan of the heart. 
Recent advancement in 3D and 4D heart model reconstruction using MRI and CT helps to visualize 
more than a 2D image [7,8]. The major limitation of the above technologies is the use of complex 
machines, which are only affordable by large hospitals, and the World Health Organization (WHO) 
reports [9] that the majority of cardiovascular disease are suffered by low- and middle-income 
countries. In such countries, relying on the above technologies for diagnosing cardiovascular diseases 
could be unaffordable by the majority of the people in low-income countries for detecting the CVD 
in advance. 
Understanding the characteristics of the heart sound (HS), also known as heart auscultation, has 
been one of the most primitive and popular methods of detecting early cardiac illnesses with the help 
of abnormal heart sounds. Phonocardiogram (PCG), also known as heart sound (HS), is a graph of 
the HS recording with the help of an equipment called as phonocardiograph [10]. There are three 
major limitations of the auscultation of the heart: Firstly, requirement of the device to be extremely 
sensitive as the sounds are of very low amplitude. Secondly, the low-amplitude HS signal can be 
easily corrupted by noise leading to faulty diagnosis. Finally, the reliability of the auscultation 
technique mainly depends on the skill, expertise, and capability of hearing of the doctor. Overcoming 
these limitations leads to motivation for work in this field. 
The beating of the heart and the resulting flow of blood through the heart produces HSs. It is 
closure of heart valves that produces the normal heart sounds: Mitral and tricuspid valve closure 
produces the first heart sound (“S1”), and aortic and pulmonic valve closure produces the second 
heart sound (“S2”) (Figure 1). Heart valve opening does not normally produce a sound. Also, flow of 
blood from one cardiac structure to another is usually laminar and, therefore, silent under normal 
conditions. Problems in either heart valves or the heart muscles or both result in abnormal heart 
sounds and murmurs. The third HS (S3) (Figure 1) is normally caused by sudden reduction of blood 
supply from the left atrium to ventricle. In children and adults (35–40 years), this is normal. However, 
in other age groups and especially in the age group more than 40 years, it is abnormal and can be 
related to dysfunction or can be related to overloading of ventricles volume [11]. The fourth heart 
sound (S4) (Figure 1) can be related to failure of heart in the diastolic period. These heart sounds can 
be further characterized as the frequency of S1 as it is smaller than S2. The low-pitched sounds S3 
and S4 occur 0.1 to 0.2 s after S2 and about 0.07 to 0.1 s before S1. There can be other HSs and heart 
murmurs that can be accounted for other cardiovascular issues [11]. 
 
Figure 1. Different heart sounds . 
Figure 1. Dierent heart sounds.
Exploring heart illnesses using intelligent classiﬁcation of HS /PCG is a highly motivated research
topic. Research work with detailed reviews and state-of-the art techniques of PCG processing
is stated in [ 12,18]. Research work explaining, in detail, the abnormalities with respective PCG
characteristics is stated in [ 12,19]. The history of the evolution of using PCG for diagnosis is stated
in [20], whereas the signal processing steps involved are discussed in [ 21]. Recent trends in machine
learning techniques (automatic classiﬁcation) and the feature selection for it is stated in [ 22] and [ 23].
Similar to the problems in machine learning techniques, di erent techniques of automatic segmentation,
extraction of relevant features, feature reduction, and state-of-the art algorithms for classiﬁcation have
been discussed in several hundred articles in the literature.
Despite being audible, S1 and S2 have their amplitude vary and sometimes become very weak
and could not be heard due to abnormalities. S1 and S2 do not have ﬁxed frequencies but are within
varied bands of frequencies in di erent cardiac periods. These limitations of the heart sound signal
segmentation led researchers to develop a rather unique approach, which can be found in [ 11,18,24–27].
The features needed for PCG classiﬁcation are of di erent types: (i) Time domain (t-domain),
(ii) frequency domain (f-domain), (iii) time–frequency domain (t,f-domain), (iv) wavelet, and (v) Mel
frequency cepstral coe cients (MFCC) features [ 23]. Several t-domain features were used by di erent
groups for the PhysioNet-2016 challenge [ 28]. There are several f-domain features that were used
for PCG classiﬁcation, since the normal and abnormal HS have clear distinction in the frequency
domain [29].
Time–frequency domain representation is well known to provide very useful information for
sound wave classiﬁcation. MFCC is the most commonly used time–frequency feature in the domain
of automatic sound wave classiﬁcation [ 30]. This feature has been widely used in many studies of
automatic classiﬁcation of sound signals. A large number of automatic PCG classiﬁcation studies use
wavelet-based features as a time–frequency representation as wavelets have certain advantages in
terms of resolutions over short time Fourier transform STFT, which is used in MFCC [31].
Many studies using time–frequency domain features of PCG signal have used deep learning
techniques for classiﬁcation with reasonable accuracy [ 32,33]. In the PhysioNet-2016 challenge [ 28],
most of the top teams used these features [ 28–30,34]. It is stated that, amongst the submissions of
the various teams in the challenge, the highest score of the competition for sensitivity, speciﬁcity,
and overall scores were 94.24%, 77.81%, and 86.02%, respectively [ 28] and therefore, there still is scope


===== PAGE 4 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 4 of 22
for improvement. In all the works stated above, numerous automatic machine learning algorithms
were tested and reported for di erent public databases. However, the combination of t-domain,
f-domain, and (t,f)-domain with a reasonable number of features, which can be applicable for real-time
classiﬁcation with high accuracy for classiﬁcation, have not been presented yet in any of the recent
works. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, none of them have employed hardware solution for
acquisition of PCG signal and real-time machine learning to classify the heart sounds into normal
and abnormal. This will help the home users to initially evaluate their disease at home without
visiting hospital frequently and, if an abnormality is observed, can go for clinical expertise to diagnose
a medical condition based on the heart sounds.
This article is organized into ﬁve sections. In the ﬁrst section, the review of di erent heart sounds
and recent works for their classiﬁcation along with the motivations of this work are summarized.
The experimental details and methods are presented in Section 2 with subsections along with di erent
hardware and software studies. We explain the method of analysis as pre-processing steps of system
evacuation in Section 3, followed by results and discussion in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the work
with future directions.
2. Experiment Details and Methods
The prototype system consists of two subsystems that communicate wirelessly using Bluetooth
low-energy (BLE) technology: Sensor subsystem, and an intelligent detection subsystem as shown in
Figure 2. The acoustic sensor ﬁrstly acquired the heart sounds signal and fed it to analog-font-end
(AFE), where it has a pre-ampliﬁcation and ﬁltering of the heart sounds signal. After that, the signal is
converted by ADC in the RFduino microcontroller and transmitted wirelessly into a personal computer
(PC) where the signal will be processed and classiﬁed using MATLAB.
A real-time heart sound signal acquisition, amplification, filtering, digitization, and wireless
transmission are accomplished by the sensor sub-system. A custom sensor was designed and implemented
using a traditional stethoscope chest piece to amplify the heart sound waveform. A small microphone
sensor with bandwidth of 20–600 Hz is selected to perform the conversion of the heart sound to electrical
signal. The microphone was placed in the rubber tubing very close to the chest piece as shown in Figure 3.
This also includes analogue front end (AFE), and RFduino microcontroller with embedded Bluetooth
low-energy (BLE) module. The custom-built stethoscope acquires the acoustic signal, amplifies and filters
it through AFE, and then digitizes and transmit the raw data to the decision-making subsystem (Figure 4).
The AFE is required to maintain a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), high common mode rejection, and less
baseline drift and saturation problems. The pre-amplifier circuit takes the very weak heart sound signals
from a microphone and amplifies it to the suitable level.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21 
 acquisition of PCG signal and real-time machine learning to classify the heart sounds into normal 
and abnormal. This will help the home users to initially evaluate their disease at home without 
visiting hospital frequently and, if an abnormality is observed, can go for clinical expertise to 
diagnose a medical condition based on the heart sounds. 
This article is organized into five sections. In the first section, the review of different heart sounds 
and recent works for their classification along with the motivations of this work are summarized. The 
experimental details and methods are presented in Section 2 with subsections along with different 
hardware and software studies. We explain the method of analysis as pre-processing steps of system 
evacuation in Section 3, followed by results and discussion in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the work 
with future directions. 
2. Experiment Details and Methods 
The prototype system consists of two subsystems that communicate wirelessly using Bluetooth 
low-energy (BLE) technology: Sensor subsystem, and an intelligent detection subsystem as shown in 
Figure 2. The acoustic sensor firstly acquired the heart sounds signal and fed it to analog-font-end 
(AFE), where it has a pre-amplification and filtering of the heart sounds signal. After that, the signal 
is converted by ADC in the RFduino microcontroller and transmitted wirelessly into a personal 
computer (PC) where the signal will be processed and classified using MATLAB. 
A real-time heart sound signal acquisition, amplification, filtering, digitization, and wireless 
transmission are accomplished by the sensor sub-system. A custom sensor was designed and 
implemented using a traditional stethoscope chest piece to amplify the heart sound waveform. A 
small microphone sensor with bandwidth of 20–600 Hz is selected to perform the conversion of the 
heart sound to electrical signal. The microphone was placed in the rubber tubing very close to the 
chest piece as shown in Figure 3. This also includes analogue front end (AFE), and RFduino 
microcontroller with embedded Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) module. The custom-built stethoscope 
acquires the acoustic signal, amplifies and filters it through AFE, and then digitizes and transmit the 
raw data to the decision-making subsystem (Figure 4). The AFE is required to maintain a high signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR), high common mode rejection, and less baseline drift and saturation problems. 
The pre-amplifier circuit takes the very weak heart sound signals from a microphone and amplifies 
it to the suitable level. 
 
Figure 2. Overall system block diagram . 
 
Figure 3. Customized acoustic sensor. 
Figure 2. Overall system block diagram.
The ARM Cortex M0 is the core of RFduino microcontroller and it has a built-in Bluetooth 4.0
low-energy module. RFduino uses Arduino IDE as user interface program, which allows testing
and running of pre-written sketches and takes advantage of the existing libraries. RFduino has 10-bit
analog-to-digital (ADC) module, which is capable of acquiring the acoustic signal at 500 Hz sampling


===== PAGE 5 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 5 of 22
rate with the resolution of 2.93 mV . Moreover, the dimension, low-power consuming feature, 3.0 V
operating voltag,e, and built-in BLE module made RFduino an excellent choice for this application.
The sensor subsystem is powered through a Li-ion battery that is connected directly through a PowerCell
board. The power management module (PMM) is a boost converter (to 3.3 V and 5 V) and micro-USB
charger in one. The boost converter is based on the TPS61200 from Texas Instrumentation (TI) and has
solder jumper selectable 5 V and 3.3 V output, and an under-voltage protection of 2.6 V . The module
can be charged by mobile charger using an on-board micro-usb connector and is capable of delivering
3.3 V or 5 V . The PMM is conﬁgured to provide 3.3 V output to the RFduino, and the AFE module.
The ﬁnal stethoscope containing the circuitry of the system designed using OR-Cad software is shown
in Figure 5.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21 
 acquisition of PCG signal and real-time machine learning to classify the heart sounds into normal 
and abnormal. This will help the home users to initially evaluate their disease at home without 
visiting hospital frequently and, if an abnormality is observed, can go for clinical expertise to 
diagnose a medical condition based on the heart sounds. 
This article is organized into five sections. In the first section, the review of different heart sounds 
and recent works for their classification along with the motivations of this work are summarized. The 
experimental details and methods are presented in Section 2 with subsections along with different 
hardware and software studies. We explain the method of analysis as pre-processing steps of system 
evacuation in Section 3, followed by results and discussion in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the work 
with future directions. 
2. Experiment Details and Methods 
The prototype system consists of two subsystems that communicate wirelessly using Bluetooth 
low-energy (BLE) technology: Sensor subsystem, and an intelligent detection subsystem as shown in 
Figure 2. The acoustic sensor firstly acquired the heart sounds signal and fed it to analog-font-end 
(AFE), where it has a pre-amplification and filtering of the heart sounds signal. After that, the signal 
is converted by ADC in the RFduino microcontroller and transmitted wirelessly into a personal 
computer (PC) where the signal will be processed and classified using MATLAB. 
A real-time heart sound signal acquisition, amplification, filtering, digitization, and wireless 
transmission are accomplished by the sensor sub-system. A custom sensor was designed and 
implemented using a traditional stethoscope chest piece to amplify the heart sound waveform. A 
small microphone sensor with bandwidth of 20–600 Hz is selected to perform the conversion of the 
heart sound to electrical signal. The microphone was placed in the rubber tubing very close to the 
chest piece as shown in Figure 3. This also includes analogue front end (AFE), and RFduino 
microcontroller with embedded Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) module. The custom-built stethoscope 
acquires the acoustic signal, amplifies and filters it through AFE, and then digitizes and transmit the 
raw data to the decision-making subsystem (Figure 4). The AFE is required to maintain a high signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR), high common mode rejection, and less baseline drift and saturation problems. 
The pre-amplifier circuit takes the very weak heart sound signals from a microphone and amplifies 
it to the suitable level. 
 
Figure 2. Overall system block diagram . 
 
Figure 3. Customized acoustic sensor. 
Figure 3. Customized acoustic sensor.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 21 
 
Figure 4. Detailed block diagram of the sensor subsystem. 
The ARM Cortex M0 is the core of RFduino microcontroller and it has a built-in Bluetooth 4.0 
low-energy module. RFduino uses Arduino IDE as user interface program, which allows testing and 
running of pre-written sketches and takes advantage of the existing libraries. RFduino has 10-bit 
analog-to-digital (ADC) module, which is capable of acquiring the acoustic signal at 500 Hz sampling 
rate with the resolution of 2.93 mV. Moreover, the dimension, low-power consuming feature, 3.0 V 
operating voltag,e, and built-in BLE module made RFduino an excellent choice for this application. 
The sensor subsystem is powered through a Li-ion battery that is connected directly through a 
PowerCell board. The power management module (PMM) is a boost converter (to 3.3 V and 5 V) and 
micro-USB charger in one. The boost converter is based on the TPS61200 from Texas Instrumentation 
(TI) and has solder jumper selectable 5 V and 3.3 V output, and an under-voltage protection of 2.6 V. 
The module can be charged by mobile charger using an on-board micro-usb connector and is capable 
of delivering 3.3 V or 5 V. The PMM is configured to provide 3.3 V output to the RFduino, and the 
AFE module. The final stethoscope containing the circuitry of the system designed using OR-Cad 
software is shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Overall implemented phonocardiogram (PCG) signal acquisition system. 
The intelligent abnormal heart sound and warning subsystem is the brain of the whole system 
and plays a major role in the system operation. It is made up of three blocks: Bluetooth module, data 
acquisition and logging, and classification. This module detects the event of abnormal heart sound in 
real-time manner depending on the acquired acoustic signals and the trained machine learning 
Figure 4. Detailed block diagram of the sensor subsystem.
The intelligent abnormal heart sound and warning subsystem is the brain of the whole system
and plays a major role in the system operation. It is made up of three blocks: Bluetooth module,
data acquisition and logging, and classiﬁcation. This module detects the event of abnormal heart sound
in real-time manner depending on the acquired acoustic signals and the trained machine learning
model. To acquire wireless PCG signal over Bluetooth, RFduino module with USB shield was used to
provide wireless interface of intelligent system with the sensor system. The heart sound was received
in the computer over BLE interface from RFduino. The classiﬁcation algorithm was not implemented
in the stethoscope itself and this task was not feasible yet with the low computational capability of
the chosen microcontroller for data digitization and transmission, however the classiﬁcation was
done online in the PC. Two phases of implementations are described in this work: (a) Matlab-based
implementation to ﬁnd the best-performing optimized algorithm, and (b) Python-based real-time
signal processing and classiﬁcation.
We have conducted a series of experimental tests to conduct the hardware and software evaluation.


===== PAGE 6 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 6 of 22
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 21 
 
Figure 4. Detailed block diagram of the sensor subsystem. 
The ARM Cortex M0 is the core of RFduino microcontroller and it has a built-in Bluetooth 4.0 
low-energy module. RFduino uses Arduino IDE as user interface program, which allows testing and 
running of pre-written sketches and takes advantage of the existing libraries. RFduino has 10-bit 
analog-to-digital (ADC) module, which is capable of acquiring the acoustic signal at 500 Hz sampling 
rate with the resolution of 2.93 mV. Moreover, the dimension, low-power consuming feature, 3.0 V 
operating voltag,e, and built-in BLE module made RFduino an excellent choice for this application. 
The sensor subsystem is powered through a Li-ion battery that is connected directly through a 
PowerCell board. The power management module (PMM) is a boost converter (to 3.3 V and 5 V) and 
micro-USB charger in one. The boost converter is based on the TPS61200 from Texas Instrumentation 
(TI) and has solder jumper selectable 5 V and 3.3 V output, and an under-voltage protection of 2.6 V. 
The module can be charged by mobile charger using an on-board micro-usb connector and is capable 
of delivering 3.3 V or 5 V. The PMM is configured to provide 3.3 V output to the RFduino, and the 
AFE module. The final stethoscope containing the circuitry of the system designed using OR-Cad 
software is shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Overall implemented phonocardiogram (PCG) signal acquisition system. 
The intelligent abnormal heart sound and warning subsystem is the brain of the whole system 
and plays a major role in the system operation. It is made up of three blocks: Bluetooth module, data 
acquisition and logging, and classification. This module detects the event of abnormal heart sound in 
real-time manner depending on the acquired acoustic signals and the trained machine learning 
Figure 5. Overall implemented phonocardiogram (PCG) signal acquisition system.
2.1. Evaluation of the Signal Fidelity of Prototype Sensor Subsystem
The quality of the heart sound signal acquired by the prototype model is compared with
the commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope (3M Health Care, Conway Ave.,
St. Paul, MN, USA). The analog front end of the prototype system is mainly made up of the pre-ampliﬁer
and band pass ﬁlter. The pre-ampliﬁer provides ampliﬁcation with gain of 11 v/v. Moreover, it provides
DC shifting controlled by the resistors R2 and R1 to remove the negative components of the signal
(Figure 6), which is necessary for the analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The resistors R4 and R3
DC-bias are the microphone input (Figure 6).
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 21 
 model. To acquire wireless PCG signal over Bluetooth, RFduino module with USB shield was used 
to provide wireless interface of intelligent system with the sensor system. The heart sound was 
received in the computer over BLE interface from RFduino. The classification algorithm was not 
implemented in the stethoscope itself and this task was not feasible yet with the low computational 
capability of the chosen microcontroller for data digitization and transmission, however the 
classification was done online in the PC. Two phases of implementations are described in this work: 
(a) Matlab-based implementation to find the best-performing optimized algorithm, and (b) Python-
based real-time signal processing and classification. 
We have conducted a series of experimental tests to conduct the hardware and software 
evaluation. 
2.1. Evaluation of the Signal Fidelity of Prototype Sensor Subsystem 
The quality of the heart sound signal acquired by the prototype model is compared with the 
commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope (3M Health Care, Conway Ave., St. Paul, 
MN, USA). The analog front end of the prototype system is mainly made up of the pre-amplifier and 
band pass filter. The pre-amplifier provides amplification with gain of 11 v/v. Moreover, it provides 
DC shifting controlled by the resistors R2 and R1 to remove the negative components of the signal 
(Figure 6), which is necessary for the analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The resistors R4 and R3 DC-
bias are the microphone input (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Schematic of the pre-amplifier of the sensor system. 
In addition, the design has a first-order band pass filter of 20–600 Hz cutoff frequencies used to 
provide extra filtering to the signal. The Bessel filter was selected to perform the filtering of the HS 
signal as it has a linear phase shift that is necessary for audio signal filtering. The design consists of a 
fourth order high-pass filter (HPF) followed by a fourth-order low-pass filter (LPF). The bandwidth 
of the filter was chosen to be between 20 Hz to 600 Hz, which is sufficient to record a clean HS signal. 
The filter has a total gain of 3.06 v/v as shown in the following calculation below. The MCP604 quad 
operational amplifier (Figure 7) was used for designing the filter as it provides low-bias current, high-
speed operation, and rail-to-rail output swing. 
Figure 6. Schematic of the pre-ampliﬁer of the sensor system.


===== PAGE 7 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 7 of 22
In addition, the design has a ﬁrst-order band pass ﬁlter of 20–600 Hz cuto frequencies used to
provide extra ﬁltering to the signal. The Bessel ﬁlter was selected to perform the ﬁltering of the HS
signal as it has a linear phase shift that is necessary for audio signal ﬁltering. The design consists of
a fourth order high-pass ﬁlter (HPF) followed by a fourth-order low-pass ﬁlter (LPF). The bandwidth
of the ﬁlter was chosen to be between 20 Hz to 600 Hz, which is su cient to record a clean HS signal.
The ﬁlter has a total gain of 3.06 v/vas shown in the following calculation below. The MCP604 quad
operational ampliﬁer (Figure 7) was used for designing the ﬁlter as it provides low-bias current,
high-speed operation, and rail-to-rail output swing.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 
 
Figure 7. Schematic of fourth-order Bessel band pass filter. 
This HS signal was transmitted to PC over BLE interface and compared with the HS signal from 
the commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope. 
2.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System 
RFduino uses Gazell (GZLL) BLE protocol to transmit data between the sensor subsystem and 
the decision-making subsystem. It is a proprietary packet radio protocol released by Nordic 
Semiconductor, which uses a star topology with one host and up to seven devices. In the GZLL 
protocol, the devices can communicate only with the host but cannot communicate directly with 
another device. The host can coordinate packets between devices. 
In our system, RFduino attached to sensor module initiated the request for data transmission 
and RFduino in the PC-side was working as host was responsible for receiving the data packet. To 
ensure reliable data transmission to the host without missing any data packet, acknowledgement of 
data packet reception in BLE buffer was used. Moreover, to increase the sampling frequency of the 
RFduino to 2000 Hz in data acquisition, heart sound data were buffered in the RFduino before 
transmission and after every 20 ms buffered frame, 40 PCG samples were sent to host. This was to 
ensure low-power consumption of the wearable system while keeping high-frequency sampling for 
reliable heart sound signal acquisition. RFduino timer interrupt was used to ensure 0.5 ms interrupt-
driven data acquisition for guaranteeing 2000 Hz sampling frequency. 
An experiment was conducted to check the performance of the wireless transmission system in 
transmitting the heart sound data over the wireless interface and evaluate the fidelity of the signal at 
2000 Hz sampling frequency. Figure 8 is showing a schematic representation of the wireless 
communication. 
 
Figure 8. Communication between the two subsystems. 
 
Figure 7. Schematic of fourth-order Bessel band pass ﬁlter.
This HS signal was transmitted to PC over BLE interface and compared with the HS signal from
the commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope.
2.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System
RFduino uses Gazell (GZLL) BLE protocol to transmit data between the sensor subsystem
and the decision-making subsystem. It is a proprietary packet radio protocol released by Nordic
Semiconductor, which uses a star topology with one host and up to seven devices. In the GZLL
protocol, the devices can communicate only with the host but cannot communicate directly with
another device. The host can coordinate packets between devices.
In our system, RFduino attached to sensor module initiated the request for data transmission
and RFduino in the PC-side was working as host was responsible for receiving the data packet.
To ensure reliable data transmission to the host without missing any data packet, acknowledgement
of data packet reception in BLE bu er was used. Moreover, to increase the sampling frequency of
the RFduino to 2000 Hz in data acquisition, heart sound data were bu ered in the RFduino before
transmission and after every 20 ms bu ered frame, 40 PCG samples were sent to host. This was
to ensure low-power consumption of the wearable system while keeping high-frequency sampling
for reliable heart sound signal acquisition. RFduino timer interrupt was used to ensure 0.5 ms
interrupt-driven data acquisition for guaranteeing 2000 Hz sampling frequency.
An experiment was conducted to check the performance of the wireless transmission system
in transmitting the heart sound data over the wireless interface and evaluate the ﬁdelity of
the signal at 2000 Hz sampling frequency. Figure 8 is showing a schematic representation of
the wireless communication.


===== PAGE 8 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 8 of 22
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 
 
Figure 7. Schematic of fourth-order Bessel band pass filter. 
This HS signal was transmitted to PC over BLE interface and compared with the HS signal from 
the commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope. 
2.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System 
RFduino uses Gazell (GZLL) BLE protocol to transmit data between the sensor subsystem and 
the decision-making subsystem. It is a proprietary packet radio protocol released by Nordic 
Semiconductor, which uses a star topology with one host and up to seven devices. In the GZLL 
protocol, the devices can communicate only with the host but cannot communicate directly with 
another device. The host can coordinate packets between devices. 
In our system, RFduino attached to sensor module initiated the request for data transmission 
and RFduino in the PC-side was working as host was responsible for receiving the data packet. To 
ensure reliable data transmission to the host without missing any data packet, acknowledgement of 
data packet reception in BLE buffer was used. Moreover, to increase the sampling frequency of the 
RFduino to 2000 Hz in data acquisition, heart sound data were buffered in the RFduino before 
transmission and after every 20 ms buffered frame, 40 PCG samples were sent to host. This was to 
ensure low-power consumption of the wearable system while keeping high-frequency sampling for 
reliable heart sound signal acquisition. RFduino timer interrupt was used to ensure 0.5 ms interrupt-
driven data acquisition for guaranteeing 2000 Hz sampling frequency. 
An experiment was conducted to check the performance of the wireless transmission system in 
transmitting the heart sound data over the wireless interface and evaluate the fidelity of the signal at 
2000 Hz sampling frequency. Figure 8 is showing a schematic representation of the wireless 
communication. 
 
Figure 8. Communication between the two subsystems. 
 
Figure 8. Communication between the two subsystems.
2.3. Evaluation of Battery Life of the Sensor Subsystem
The Sparkfun power cell charger /Booster Module was selected as power management module
(PMM) for the system. A lithium polymer battery (LiPo) of 3.7 V (300 mAH) was used with the module
along with PMM, and is capable of delivering 3.3 V to the system. The battery life can be found
using the following equation, where the factor 0.70 (https: //www.digikey.com /en/resources /conversion-
calculators /conversion-calculator-battery-life) then makes allowances for external factors that can
aect the battery life. Figure 9 shows the experimental setup for measuring power consumption of
the portable system.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 21 
 2.3. Evaluation of Battery Life of the Sensor Subsystem 
The Sparkfun power cell charger/Booster Module was selected as power management module 
(PMM) for the system. A lithium polymer battery (LiPo) of 3.7 V (300 mAH) was used with the 
module along with PMM, and is capable of delivering 3.3 V to the system. The battery life can be 
found using the following equation, where the factor 0.70 
(https://www.digikey.com/en/resources/conversion-calculators/conversion-calculator-battery-life) 
then makes allowances for external factors that can affect the battery life. Figure 9 shows the 
experimental setup for measuring power consumption of the portable system. 
 
 
Figure 9. Evaluation of overall power consumption of the sensor module. 
𝐁𝐚𝐭𝐭𝐞𝐫𝐲 𝐋𝐢𝐟𝐞=𝐁𝐚𝐭𝐭𝐞𝐫𝐲 𝐂𝐚𝐩𝐚𝐜𝐢𝐭𝐲 (𝐦𝐀𝐡)
𝐋𝐨𝐚𝐝 𝐂𝐮𝐫𝐫𝐞𝐧𝐭 𝐢𝐧 𝐦𝐢𝐥𝐥 𝐚𝐦𝐩𝐬 ×𝟎.𝟕𝟎 (1) 
2.4. Performance Evaluation of Machine Learning Abnormality Detection Algorithms 
Normal and abnormal heart sound data from a public PhysioNet-2016 challenge database were 
used for training and testing of the machine learning algorithms in the Matlab environment to 
identify the best-performing algorithm and optimize the parameters of the best-performing 
algorithms to obtain the highest accuracy. 
2.4.1. Database Description 
PhysioNet challenge 2016 dataset consists of five databases (A through E) containing a total of 
3126 heart sound recordings, lasting from 5 s to just over 120 s. These HS data were recorded from 
clinical and nonclinical environment from both healthy and pathological patients (e.g., children and 
adults) from four different locations—aortic, pulmonic, tricuspid, and mitral areas. In both training 
and test sets, heart sound recordings were divided into two types: Normal and abnormal heart sound 
recordings. Both the training and test sets are unbalanced, i.e., the number of normal recordings does 
not equal that of abnormal recordings. The number of normal recordings is higher than abnormal 
recordings. The recordings last from several seconds to up to more than 100 s. All recordings have 
been resampled to 2000 Hz and have been provided as.wav format. Each recording contains only one 
PCG lead. 
2.4.2. Optimized Classification Model Selection 
The classification model selection is shown (Figure 10) with work flow diagram of the signal 
pre-processing and application of machine learning algorithm. The HS data from the database were 
segmented to training and testing datasets. Signal pre-processing and automatic segmentation were 
accomplished using the signal processing toolbox, and training and classification of HS were 
accomplished by the statistics and machine learning toolbox in the Matlab 2018a. The pre-processing 
steps of the HS are summarized in the analysis section. Several time (t)-domain, frequency (f)-
domain, and Mel frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) features were extracted from the segmented 
Figure 9. Evaluation of overall power consumption of the sensor module.
Battery Life =Battery Capacity (mAh )
Load Current in mill amps0.70 (1)
2.4. Performance Evaluation of Machine Learning Abnormality Detection Algorithms
Normal and abnormal heart sound data from a public PhysioNet-2016 challenge database were
used for training and testing of the machine learning algorithms in the Matlab environment to identify
the best-performing algorithm and optimize the parameters of the best-performing algorithms to
obtain the highest accuracy.
2.4.1. Database Description
PhysioNet challenge 2016 dataset consists of ﬁve databases (A through E) containing a total
of 3126 heart sound recordings, lasting from 5 s to just over 120 s. These HS data were recorded
from clinical and nonclinical environment from both healthy and pathological patients (e.g., children
and adults) from four di erent locations—aortic, pulmonic, tricuspid, and mitral areas. In both training
and test sets, heart sound recordings were divided into two types: Normal and abnormal heart sound
recordings. Both the training and test sets are unbalanced, i.e., the number of normal recordings does
not equal that of abnormal recordings. The number of normal recordings is higher than abnormal


===== PAGE 9 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 9 of 22
recordings. The recordings last from several seconds to up to more than 100 s. All recordings have
been resampled to 2000 Hz and have been provided as.wav format. Each recording contains only one
PCG lead.
2.4.2. Optimized Classiﬁcation Model Selection
The classiﬁcation model selection is shown (Figure 10) with work ﬂow diagram of the signal
pre-processing and application of machine learning algorithm. The HS data from the database
were segmented to training and testing datasets. Signal pre-processing and automatic segmentation
were accomplished using the signal processing toolbox, and training and classiﬁcation of HS were
accomplished by the statistics and machine learning toolbox in the Matlab 2018a. The pre-processing
steps of the HS are summarized in the analysis section. Several time (t)-domain, frequency (f)-domain,
and Mel frequency cepstral coe cients (MFCC) features were extracted from the segmented HS data.
The training dataset underwent pre-processing steps before it was fed into the machine learning
algorithms for training. The details of the pre-processing steps and detection algorithm will be
discussed in the analysis section.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 21 
 HS data. The training dataset underwent pre-processing steps before it was fed into the machine 
learning algorithms for training. The details of the pre-processing steps and detection algorithm will 
be discussed in the analysis section. 
 
Figure 10. Blocks of the machine learning-based abnormality detection algorithm. 
Twenty-two different ML algorithms (three decision tree, two discriminant analysis, six support 
vector machines (SVM), six k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and five ensembles classifiers) were trained 
with five-fold cross-validation using 27 features of the training dataset and the best-performing 
algorithm was identified. Feature reduction and hyper-parameter optimization was used to optimize 
the best-performing algorithm. Their validation accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity along with other 
performance metrics were evaluated. The trained model was used for calculating the performance 
evaluation matrix for the testing data in identifying the normal and abnormal HS. 
2.5. Real-Time Classification of Heart Sound Signals 
For the real-time implementation, heart sound data were buffered for 10 s and then the baseline 
drift was corrected, segmented to heart sound beats (one heart sound trace), and band-limited 
filtering in Python 3.5. A multi-threaded python script was written to acquire, buffer, real-time pre-
process, and classify the heart sound data in the host computer. Signal pre-processing (such as real-
time filtering and feature extraction) and segmentation were implemented in a PC using Numpy 
(v1.13.3), scikit-learn (v0.20), and Matplotlib (v3.0.2) libraries. The best-performing algorithm was 
then implemented in the PC for real-time classification using PyBrain (v0.31) and Scikit learn (v0.20) 
libraries. The decision of the real-time classifier is displayed in a graphical user interface (GUI) built 
on tkinter module. For real-time testing, PCG signals were acquired from six healthy (three males 
and three females, age range: 20–45 years, mean: 31.2 years, standard deviation: 9.6 years) and six 
patients with murmur (three males and three females, age range: 39–56 years, mean: 46.7 years, 
standard deviation: 6.4 years) with written informed consent from subjects and approval from local 
ethics committee. 
3. Analysis 
There are several pre-processing steps that were applied to the heart sound data before it can be 
used by the machine learning algorithm. During the training and testing period, these steps were 
done manually, and these were made automatic for real-time classification. 
3.1. Pre-Processing Steps 
The following pre-processing steps were carried out to filter the noises and spikes, and segment 
the HS data: 
3.1.1. Filtering and Spikes Removal 
Figure 10. Blocks of the machine learning-based abnormality detection algorithm.
Twenty-two di erent ML algorithms (three decision tree, two discriminant analysis, six support
vector machines (SVM), six k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and ﬁve ensembles classiﬁers) were trained
with ﬁve-fold cross-validation using 27 features of the training dataset and the best-performing
algorithm was identiﬁed. Feature reduction and hyper-parameter optimization was used to optimize
the best-performing algorithm. Their validation accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity along with other
performance metrics were evaluated. The trained model was used for calculating the performance
evaluation matrix for the testing data in identifying the normal and abnormal HS.
2.5. Real-Time Classiﬁcation of Heart Sound Signals
For the real-time implementation, heart sound data were bu ered for 10 s and then the baseline
drift was corrected, segmented to heart sound beats (one heart sound trace), and band-limited ﬁltering
in Python 3.5. A multi-threaded python script was written to acquire, bu er, real-time pre-process,
and classify the heart sound data in the host computer. Signal pre-processing (such as real-time ﬁltering
and feature extraction) and segmentation were implemented in a PC using Numpy (v1.13.3), scikit-learn
(v0.20), and Matplotlib (v3.0.2) libraries. The best-performing algorithm was then implemented in
the PC for real-time classiﬁcation using PyBrain (v0.31) and Scikit learn (v0.20) libraries. The decision
of the real-time classiﬁer is displayed in a graphical user interface (GUI) built on tkinter module.
For real-time testing, PCG signals were acquired from six healthy (three males and three females,
age range: 20–45 years, mean: 31.2 years, standard deviation: 9.6 years) and six patients with murmur
(three males and three females, age range: 39–56 years, mean: 46.7 years, standard deviation: 6.4 years)
with written informed consent from subjects and approval from local ethics committee.


===== PAGE 10 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 10 of 22
3. Analysis
There are several pre-processing steps that were applied to the heart sound data before it can be
used by the machine learning algorithm. During the training and testing period, these steps were done
manually, and these were made automatic for real-time classiﬁcation.
3.1. Pre-Processing Steps
The following pre-processing steps were carried out to ﬁlter the noises and spikes, and segment
the HS data:
3.1.1. Filtering and Spikes Removal
A sixth-order bandpass IIR ﬁlter with the lower cut-o frequency of 20 Hz, higher cuto frequency
of 600 Hz, and the sample rate of 2000 Hz was used to ﬁlter the HS data to remove any potential low-or
high-frequency noise.
3.1.2. Segmentation
Segmentation of the PCG signals into heart cycles or marking of cycle starting instances are
very important to generate the epoch of interest for training, and testing of the machine learning
algorithm. There is much literature and state-of-the-art tools publicly available for segmenting the HS
data. Since the location of the HS acquisition place has signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the noise contamination
to the PCG signal; therefore, extraction of the heart cycle period reliably is a challenging task.
However, when the PCG signal was recorded with electrocardiogram (ECG) signal, this segmentation
process become comparatively easier as ECG R-peaks are more distinct than the PCG signal’s S1 and S2
peaks. In this work, we have automatically identiﬁed the S1 peaks, which are the most dominant peak
of the PCG signal. PCG signal between one S1 peak to another S1 peak was used mainly as the heart
cycle along with o set to capture the beginning of S1 signal and ending of S2 signal. Figure 11 shows
how the normal and abnormal PCG signal of several seconds were segmented to heart cycle.
Figure 11. Cont .


===== PAGE 11 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 11 of 22
Figure 11. Normal and abnormal heart sounds (HS): ( A,D) detection of peaks; ( B,E) overlaid segments;
(C,F) average of the segments.
3.2. Feature Extraction
The power spectral of the signal in Figure 12 shows that the power spectral density peaks
appear at di erent frequencies for normal and abnormal PCG signals. Moreover, the power spectral
density at higher frequency has no peak for normal PCG signal, whereas this is not the case for
abnormal PCG signals and there are several peaks in between 300 Hz to 600 Hz. This reﬂects
that the simple frequency domain feature can help signiﬁcantly in classifying the PCG signals.
However, more t-domain, f-domain, and Mel frequency cepstral coe cients (MFCC) provide insight
on the signal while compensating for the noise or motion artefacts. Moreover, it has been shown
in the literature that the MFCC features can contribute signiﬁcantly in classifying the sound waves.
Therefore, 27 features encompassing t-domain, f-domain, and MFCC features were extracted for
each heart sound cycle (Table 1). The t-domain, f-domain and MFCC features used in this study
are taken based on the previous works [ 28–30]. The t-domain features were: Mean value, median
value, standard deviation, mean absolute deviation, signal 25th percentile, signal 75th percentile,
signal interquartile range, skewness, kurtosis, and Shannon’s entropy; whereas the f-domain features
were: Spectral entropy, maximum frequency in the power spectrum, signal magnitude at maximum
frequency, and ratio of signal energy between maximum frequency range and overall signal. The rest
of the features were MFCC features.
Figure 12. Cont .


===== PAGE 12 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 12 of 22
Figure 12. Time domain PCG trace and its power spectral density for normal and abnormal subjects.
Table 1. Extracted features.
Feature Deﬁnition Equation
MeanSum of all data divided by the number of
entries.x=Px
n
MedianValue that is in the middle of ordered set of
data.Odd numbers of entries: Median =middle
data entry.
Even numbers of entries: Median =adding
the two numbers in the middle
and dividing the result by two.
Standard DeviationMeasure variability and consistency of
the sample. s=qP(x x)2
n 1
PercentileThe data value at which the percent of
the value in the data set are less than or
equal to this value.25th=25
100
n
75th=75
100
n
Mean Absolute DeviationAverage distance between the mean
and each data value.MAD =Pn
i=1jxi xj
n
Inter Quartile Range The measure of the middle 50% of a data set.IQR=Q3– Q 1
Q3: third quartile, Q 1: ﬁrst quartile,
Quartile: dividing the data set into four
equal portions.
SkewnessThe measure of the lack of symmetry from
the mean of the dataset.g1=PN
i=1(Yi Y)3/N
s3
Y: mean, s: the standard deviation, N:
number of the data.
KurtosisThe pointedness of a peak in distribution
curve, in other words it’s the measure of
sharpness of the peak of distribution curve.k=PN
i=1(Yi Y)4/N
s4 3
Y: mean, s: the standard deviation, N:
the number of data.
Shannon’s EntropyEntropy measures the degree of
randomness in a set of data, higher entropy
indicates a greater randomness, and lower
entropy indicates a lower randomness.H(x) = PN 1
i=0pilog2pi
Spectral EntropyThe normalized Shannon’s entropy that is
applied to the power spectrum density of
the signal.SEN = PN 1
i=0pklog2pk
log N
pk: the spectral power of the normalized
frequency, N: the number of frequencies
in binary
Maximum FrequencyThe value of highest frequency in the signal
spectrumfmax
Magnitude at Fmax Signal magnitude at highest Frequency X( fmax)
Ratio of signal energyRatio of signal energy between fmaxDf
and the whole spectrumX (fmaxDf)/PN 1
i=0Xi(f)
MFCC (13 features)Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coe cients
(MFCC): coe cients that collectively make
up a Mel-Frequency Cepstral (MFC).x=x 0.95*[0; x (1: N-1)];
X= t(x);


===== PAGE 13 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 13 of 22
3.3. Classiﬁcation
A large variety of machine learning (ML) algorithms can be used for classifying the HS signals
into normal and abnormal. In the subsequent section, we will discuss the training and validation
of dierent ML model, and testing of the pre-trained best performing model for classiﬁcation of HS
signals to detect abnormality in a real-time manner.
Performance Evaluation Matrix
The benchmark dataset was randomly partitioned into two subsets: (i) Training and validation set
(80% of data), and (ii) testing set (20% of data). The ML model were trained for two classes: “normal”
and “abnormal”. To compare the performance of several ML algorithms in classifying PCG signals,
confusion matrices for each algorithm after 5-fold cross-validation were created and several standard
statistical evaluation parameters were calculated to evaluate the performance of the algorithms:
True Positive Rate (TPR) /Recall /Sensitivity:
Recall =TP
TP+FN(2)
Speciﬁcity:
Speci f icity =TN
TN+FP(3)
False Positive Rate (FPR):
FPR =1 Speci f icity =FP
TN+FP(4)
Precision:
Precision =TP
TP+FP(5)
F-measure or score:
F score =2RecallPrecision
Recall +Precision(6)
Accuracy:
Accuracy (ACC )=TP+TN
P+N(7)
Error:
Error =1 Accuracy (8)
Matthews correlation coe cient, MCC =(TPTN FPFN)
((TP+FP)PN(TN+FN))0.5(9)
where TP is true positive, TN is true negative, FP is false positive, FN is false negative, P =TP+
FN and N =FP+TN.
The above-mentioned parameters were estimated using 5-fold cross validation such that
the training database was divided into ﬁve equal sets. Out of ﬁve sets, four sets were used for
training while one set was used for testing. This process is repeated ﬁve times such that each set is
tested once. The ﬁnal results are obtained by averaging the results of all the iterations. The average
of all the above-mentioned parameters were calculated. Performance evaluation of three di erent
best-performing ML algorithms were calculated to identify best one in the testing phase.
3.4. Feature Reduction
Neighborhood component analysis (NCA) is a non-parametric and embedded method for selecting
features with the goal of maximizing prediction accuracy of classiﬁcation algorithms. The Statistics
and Machine Learning Toolbox built-in functions can be used to perform NCA feature selection


===== PAGE 14 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 14 of 22
with regularization to learn feature weights for minimization of an objective function that measures
the average leave-one-out classiﬁcation loss over the training data. It was found that the most
contributory features are 15 features out of the 27 features. These are kurtosis, maximum frequency
value, and all of the MFCC features. The ML algorithms were trained again with the same training
data subset with the reduced feature matrix to see whether this feature reduction can improve
the classiﬁcation accuracy by reducing over-ﬁtting or not. Performance measures were calculated for
the three best-performing algorithms to identify the best one for the testing data subset.
3.5. Hyperparameter Optimization of the Best-Performing Algorithm
Each of the trained machine learning algorithms were trained with some default parameters,
which produce a particular validation accuracy; however, these algorithms can be tuned to optimize
their hyperparameters. It would be a very tedious task to tune all the algorithms trained to check
the validation accuracy. Therefore, the best-performing algorithms were optimized to calculate
the performance measures. The accuracy and other performance measures were then calculated for
the testing dataset (20% of the whole database).
3.6. Unequal Misclassiﬁcation Costs
It is apparent from Table 2 that the number of abnormal and normal observations for both
the training and testing datasets are unequal or the dataset is imbalanced. Moreover, misclassifying
observations of abnormal class has more severe consequences than misclassifying observations of
normal class. Since the classes are adequately represented in the training data but we have to treat them
asymmetrically, the cost of classes were made di erent. Since we want to classify patients with normal
and abnormal heart sounds, failure to identify an abnormal class (false negative) has far more severe
consequences than misidentifying normal class as abnormal (false positive). We have assigned 10 times
more cost to misidentifying abnormal HS as normal HS and low cost to misidentifying normal HS
as abnormal HS. We have trained best-performing classiﬁcation algorithm with unequal classiﬁcation
costs to increase accuracy for abnormal HS with higher accuracy by partially scarifying the accuracy of
the normal HS classiﬁcation. This partial reduction in the accuracy in normal HS classiﬁcation should
be acceptable, as this is only a screening test.
Table 2. Dataset observation.
Categories No. of Observation
Training and ValidationAbnormal 2505
Normal 7907
TestingAbnormal 653
Normal 1950
4. Results and Discussion
This section summarizes the results from the hardware experiments and algorithm performance
evaluation studies.
4.1. Evaluation of the Signal Fidelity of Prototype Sensor Subsystem
A commercial 3M Littmann Classic III Monitoring Stethoscope was used as a reference to be
compared with the designed digital stethoscope output. The Littmann Classic III digital stethoscope
was set to bell mode that has a bandwidth of range 20–600 Hz to match the frequency range of
the designed stethoscope. Both systems were setup to sample the captured heart sounds signal using
sampling frequency equal to 2 KHz. It was important to change the digital stethoscope sampling
frequency to 2 KHz for accurate comparison. Diaphragms (chest-piece) of the Littmann stethoscope
and prototyped stethoscope were placed simultaneously on the chest of the subject under study.


===== PAGE 15 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 15 of 22
Figure 13 shows the heart sounds signal of the designed digital stethoscope and its digital ﬁltered
version and also shows the results of the commercial digital stethoscope from subject 1. Both signals
were captured at the same time from the same subject (subject 1) while the chest-piece was placed
on the chest (horizontally side-by-side) simultaneously. The prototype digital stethoscope signal
shows clearly the same S1 and S2 components shown in the commercial one; however, it has more
ampliﬁcation than the commercial one in the original signal (Figure 13A) and closer to the commercial
one in the digitally band-limited version (Figure 13C).
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 21 
 
Figure 13. Comparison between the output PCG signal from prototype stethoscope ( A), commercial 
stethoscope ( B), and band-limited PCG signal prototype system ( C). 
4.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System 
The HS signals were transmitted over BLE to the decision-making subsystem as mentioned in 
the methodology to compare the transmission reliability. However, to evaluate the transmission 
reliability, a special testing arrangement was made (shown in Figure 14). In test-setup, the wearable 
system’s RFduino was connected to a PC using USB interface while sending PCG data packets to the 
host computer over BLE using GZLL protocol. The PCG signal over BLE was logged in the host 
computer and plotted using MATLAB to compare with the transmitted signal. It was compared 
packet by packet to identify any discrepancy of the received data (i.e., packet loss) during the 
transmission. It was observed that acknowledged and frame-based data transmission ensures the 
communication reliability and there was no packet loss observed in the transmission. The received 
signal was evaluated in time domain and time –frequency domain to observe any potential missing 
frequency components in the received PCG signal, as shown in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 14. Test setup for Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) reliability evaluation along with transmitted 
and received PCG signal. Time (s)
Time (s)
Commercial digital stethoscope
Digital Filtered Heart Sound Signal Digitized HS signal from Prototype digital stethoscope
S1
S1
S1S2
S2
S2
A 
B
C
Figure 13. Comparison between the output PCG signal from prototype stethoscope ( A), commercial
stethoscope ( B), and band-limited PCG signal prototype system ( C).
4.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System
The HS signals were transmitted over BLE to the decision-making subsystem as mentioned in
the methodology to compare the transmission reliability. However, to evaluate the transmission
reliability, a special testing arrangement was made (shown in Figure 14). In test-setup, the wearable
system’s RFduino was connected to a PC using USB interface while sending PCG data packets to
the host computer over BLE using GZLL protocol. The PCG signal over BLE was logged in the host
computer and plotted using MATLAB to compare with the transmitted signal. It was compared packet
by packet to identify any discrepancy of the received data (i.e., packet loss) during the transmission.
It was observed that acknowledged and frame-based data transmission ensures the communication
reliability and there was no packet loss observed in the transmission. The received signal was evaluated
in time domain and time–frequency domain to observe any potential missing frequency components
in the received PCG signal, as shown in Figure 15.


===== PAGE 16 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 16 of 22
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 21 
 
Figure 13. Comparison between the output PCG signal from prototype stethoscope ( A), commercial 
stethoscope ( B), and band-limited PCG signal prototype system ( C). 
4.2. Evaluation of the Reliability of the BLE Transmission System 
The HS signals were transmitted over BLE to the decision-making subsystem as mentioned in 
the methodology to compare the transmission reliability. However, to evaluate the transmission 
reliability, a special testing arrangement was made (shown in Figure 14). In test-setup, the wearable 
system’s RFduino was connected to a PC using USB interface while sending PCG data packets to the 
host computer over BLE using GZLL protocol. The PCG signal over BLE was logged in the host 
computer and plotted using MATLAB to compare with the transmitted signal. It was compared 
packet by packet to identify any discrepancy of the received data (i.e., packet loss) during the 
transmission. It was observed that acknowledged and frame-based data transmission ensures the 
communication reliability and there was no packet loss observed in the transmission. The received 
signal was evaluated in time domain and time–frequency domain to observe any potential missing 
frequency components in the received PCG signal, as shown in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 14. Test setup for Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) reliability evaluation along with transmitted 
and received PCG signal. Time (s)
Time (s)
Commercial digital stethoscope
Digital Filtered Heart Sound Signal Digitized HS signal from Prototype digital stethoscope
S1
S1
S1S2
S2
S2
A
B
C
Figure 14. Test setup for Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) reliability evaluation along with transmitted
and received PCG signal.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 21 
 
Figure 15. Representation of time domain and time–frequency domain analysis of the received signal. 
4.3. Evaluation of Battery Life of the Sensor Subsystem 
The load current of the sensor circuit was found to be 1.18 mA, and the current when there was 
BLE transmission was 6 mA; thus, the total current consumption of the sensor circuit and BLE 
transmission would be 7.18 mA. The power consumption measurement was done utilizing the 
arrangement, as shown in Figure 9. The rating of the battery is 300 mAh and the battery life is (300 
mAh/7.18 mA) × 0.7 ≈ 41 h; the system can be powered continuously for around 1.5 days from that 
battery if we consider that the BLE is continuously running even though, in practice, data were sent 
over BLE every 20 ms. However, the average current is 1.48 mA and battery life should be (300 
mAh/1.48 mA) × 0.7 ≈ 142 h (i.e., 5.9 days). Therefore, overall battery life of the system will be several 
days. 
4.4. Performance Eevaluation of Machine Learning Abnormality Detection Algorithm 
Twenty-two different algorithms (three decision tree, two discriminant analysis, six support 
vector machines (SVM), six k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and five ensembles classifiers) were trained 
using 27 features of the training dataset (80% of the whole dataset). The validation accuracy and their 
corresponding performance measures are listed in Table 3. 
It is obvious from the above table that the best validation accuracy was observed for “Fine Tree” 
classifier. Moreover, the accuracy of classifying normal is higher than abnormal and this is because 
of the imbalanced dataset as shown in Table 2. Therefore, we needed to check the potential over-
fitting of the features. This could be dealt with by reducing the number of features used in the training 
process. Therefore, the training dataset was retrained with the reduced number of features (15) and 
the confusion matrix and evaluation measures were calculated. Table 4 summarizes the accuracy and 
other evaluation measures for identifying the best algorithm after feature reduction. 
Table 3. Performance measures of three best performing algorithms for full-feature set. 
Items Fine KNN Weighted KNN Ensemble Subspace Discriminant 
Accuracy 94.63% 93.72 93.17% 
Accuracy: Abnormal 88%,12% 85%,15% 87%, 13% 
Accuracy: Normal 96.6%, 3.4% 97%,3% 95%, 5% 
Error 5.37% 6.28% 6.83% 
Sensitivity 96.32% 95.24% 95.67% 
Specificity 89.34% 88.72% 85.49% 
Precision 96.62% 96.54% 95.29% 
FPR 10.66% 11.28% 14.51% 
F_Score 96.46% 95.88% 95.48% 
MCC 85.34% 82.7% 81.5% 
Figure 15. Representation of ( A) time domain and ( B) time-frequency domain analysis of the received signal.
4.3. Evaluation of Battery Life of the Sensor Subsystem
The load current of the sensor circuit was found to be 1.18 mA, and the current when there was BLE
transmission was 6 mA; thus, the total current consumption of the sensor circuit and BLE transmission
would be 7.18 mA. The power consumption measurement was done utilizing the arrangement,
as shown in Figure 9. The rating of the battery is 300 mAh and the battery life is (300 mAh /7.18 mA)
0.741 h; the system can be powered continuously for around 1.5 days from that battery if we
consider that the BLE is continuously running even though, in practice, data were sent over BLE every
20 ms. However, the average current is 1.48 mA and battery life should be (300 mAh /1.48 mA)0.7
142 h (i.e., 5.9 days). Therefore, overall battery life of the system will be several days.
4.4. Performance Eevaluation of Machine Learning Abnormality Detection Algorithm
Twenty-two di erent algorithms (three decision tree, two discriminant analysis, six support vector
machines (SVM), six k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and ﬁve ensembles classiﬁers) were trained using
27 features of the training dataset (80% of the whole dataset). The validation accuracy and their
corresponding performance measures are listed in Table 3.


===== PAGE 17 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 17 of 22
Table 3. Performance measures of three best performing algorithms for full-feature set.
Items Fine KNN Weighted KNN Ensemble Subspace Discriminant
Accuracy 94.63% 93.72 93.17%
Accuracy: Abnormal 88%,12% 85%,15% 87%, 13%
Accuracy: Normal 96.6%, 3.4% 97%,3% 95%, 5%
Error 5.37% 6.28% 6.83%
Sensitivity 96.32% 95.24% 95.67%
Speciﬁcity 89.34% 88.72% 85.49%
Precision 96.62% 96.54% 95.29%
FPR 10.66% 11.28% 14.51%
F_Score 96.46% 95.88% 95.48%
MCC 85.34% 82.7% 81.5%
It is obvious from the above table that the best validation accuracy was observed for “Fine Tree”
classiﬁer. Moreover, the accuracy of classifying normal is higher than abnormal and this is because of
the imbalanced dataset as shown in Table 2. Therefore, we needed to check the potential over-ﬁtting
of the features. This could be dealt with by reducing the number of features used in the training
process. Therefore, the training dataset was retrained with the reduced number of features (15)
and the confusion matrix and evaluation measures were calculated. Table 4 summarizes the accuracy
and other evaluation measures for identifying the best algorithm after feature reduction.
Table 4. Performance measures of three best performing algorithms for reduced-feature set.
Items Fine KNN Weighted KNN Ensemble Subspace Discriminant
Accuracy 92.36% 92.02% 92.89%
Accuracy: Abnormal 84%,16% 82%,18% 83%, 17%
Accuracy: Normal 95%, 5% 95%,5% 96%, 4%
Error 7.64% 7.98% 7.11%
Sensitivity 94.85% 94.30% 94.77%
Speciﬁcity 84.52% 84.62% 86.71%
Precision 95.08% 95.22% 95.90%
FPR 15.48% 15.38% 13.29%
F_Score 94.96% 94.76% 95.33%
MCC 79.17% 78.09% 80.42%
However, it is apparent from Table 4 that the overall accuracy was reduced, and classifying normal
and abnormal were also both reduced even though the same algorithms were performing best in
the classiﬁcation after feature reduction. Therefore, it can be said that the features used for classiﬁcation
are optimized and cannot be reduced.
To improve the performance of the best-performing algorithms by optimizing the hyperparameters
of the algorithms, it was observed that the performance of the ensemble algorithm can be improved.
Two important parameters were optimized for the ensemble algorithms: “Distance” and “Number of
neighbors”. Figure 16 shows the optimization of two parameters and Figure 17 shows the number of
required iterations to reach the objective.


===== PAGE 18 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 18 of 22
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 21 
 Table 4. Performance measures of three best performing algorithms for reduced-feature set. 
Items Fine KNN Weighted KNN Ensemble Subspace Discriminant 
Accuracy 92.36% 92.02% 92.89% 
Accuracy: Abnormal 84%,16% 82%,18% 83%, 17% 
Accuracy: Normal 95%, 5% 95%,5% 96%, 4% 
Error 7.64% 7.98% 7.11% 
Sensitivity 94.85% 94.30% 94.77% 
Specificity 84.52% 84.62% 86.71% 
Precision 95.08% 95.22% 95.90% 
FPR 15.48% 15.38% 13.29% 
F_Score 94.96% 94.76% 95.33% 
MCC 79.17% 78.09% 80.42% 
However, it is apparent from Table 4 that the overall accuracy was reduced, and classifying 
normal and abnormal were also both reduced even though the same algorithms were performing 
best in the classification after feature reduction. Therefore, it can be said that the features used for 
classification are optimized and cannot be reduced. 
To improve the performance of the best-performing algorithms by optimizing the 
hyperparameters of the algorithms, it was observed that the performance of the ensemble algorithm 
can be improved. Two important parameters were optimized for the ensemble algorithms: 
“Distance” and “Number of neighbors”. Figure 16 shows the optimization of two parameters and 
Figure 17 shows the number of required iterations to reach the objective. 
 
Figure 16. Optimization of hyperparameter for ensemble algorithm. 
spearman
seuclidean
minkowski
mahalanobis
jaccard
hamming
euclidean
cosine
correlation
chebychev
cityblock
Figure 16. Optimization of hyperparameter for ensemble algorithm.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 21 
 
Figure 17. Number of evaluations to reach minimum objective. 
The best-performing and hyperparameter-optimized algorithm was retrained with cost 
adjustment to make sure that the “abnormal HS” will be classified with more confidence than the 
“normal HS”. The result of this asymmetric cost adjustment is shown in Figure 17. It is evident that 
the classification accuracy of abnormal HS became approximately 97% while that is for normal HS is 
approximately 88% (Figure 18). The team with the highest score of the PhysioNet-2016 challenge 
competition reported sensitivity, specificity, and overall scores of 94.24%, 77.81%, and 86.02%, 
respectively [28]; however, in this work, an overall sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 96.32%, 
89.34%, and 94.63%, respectively were attained. It therefore can be observed that the trained model 
can much more reliably classify abnormal HS sound with 96.68% accuracy and normal HS with 
87.87% for the testing dataset, as shown in Figure 18. 
 
Figure 18. Confusion matrix for hyperparameter optimized ensemble algorithm for test dataset. 
4.5. Real-Time Classification of Heart Sound Signals 
The trained model was exported to generate Matlab code, which was ported to python-based 
implementation for real-time classification. Python provides the benefit of multi-threaded 
programming to implement a separate thread to handle data acquisition from sensor subsystem and 
buffering data for 10 s and automatic segmenting this buffered frame into an HS (S1-S2 epoch) 
segment; which was used to calculate all the features in a separate thread and a dedicated classifier 
thread was implemented to classify the HS using the trained model. Both the recall and precision are 
reasonable for reliable detection and this is true for both positive and negative classification. Figure 
19 shows the GUI showing the data acquisition, segmentation, and classification interface developed 
using python for real-time classification and tested using six normal and abnormal subjects. 
Figure 17. Number of evaluations to reach minimum objective.
The best-performing and hyperparameter-optimized algorithm was retrained with cost adjustment
to make sure that the “abnormal HS” will be classiﬁed with more conﬁdence than the “normal HS”.
The result of this asymmetric cost adjustment is shown in Figure 17. It is evident that the classiﬁcation
accuracy of abnormal HS became approximately 97% while that is for normal HS is approximately 88%
(Figure 18). The team with the highest score of the PhysioNet-2016 challenge competition reported
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and overall scores of 94.24%, 77.81%, and 86.02%, respectively [ 28]; however,
in this work, an overall sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and accuracy of 96.32%, 89.34%, and 94.63%, respectively
were attained. It therefore can be observed that the trained model can much more reliably classify
abnormal HS sound with 96.68% accuracy and normal HS with 87.87% for the testing dataset, as shown
in Figure 18.


===== PAGE 19 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 19 of 22
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 21 
 
Figure 17. Number of evaluations to reach minimum objective. 
The best-performing and hyperparameter-optimized algorithm was retrained with cost 
adjustment to make sure that the “abnormal HS” will be classified with more confidence than the 
“normal HS”. The result of this asymmetric cost adjustment is shown in Figure 17. It is evident that 
the classification accuracy of abnormal HS became approximately 97% while that is for normal HS is 
approximately 88% (Figure 18). The team with the highest score of the PhysioNet-2016 challenge 
competition reported sensitivity, specificity, and overall scores of 94.24%, 77.81%, and 86.02%, 
respectively [28]; however, in this work, an overall sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 96.32%, 
89.34%, and 94.63%, respectively were attained. It therefore can be observed that the trained model 
can much more reliably classify abnormal HS sound with 96.68% accuracy and normal HS with 
87.87% for the testing dataset, as shown in Figure 18. 
 
Figure 18. Confusion matrix for hyperparameter optimized ensemble algorithm for test dataset. 
4.5. Real-Time Classification of Heart Sound Signals 
The trained model was exported to generate Matlab code, which was ported to python-based 
implementation for real-time classification. Python provides the benefit of multi-threaded 
programming to implement a separate thread to handle data acquisition from sensor subsystem and 
buffering data for 10 s and automatic segmenting this buffered frame into an HS (S1-S2 epoch) 
segment; which was used to calculate all the features in a separate thread and a dedicated classifier 
thread was implemented to classify the HS using the trained model. Both the recall and precision are 
reasonable for reliable detection and this is true for both positive and negative classification. Figure 
19 shows the GUI showing the data acquisition, segmentation, and classification interface developed 
using python for real-time classification and tested using six normal and abnormal subjects. 
Figure 18. Confusion matrix for hyperparameter optimized ensemble algorithm for test dataset.
4.5. Real-Time Classiﬁcation of Heart Sound Signals
The trained model was exported to generate Matlab code, which was ported to python-based
implementation for real-time classiﬁcation. Python provides the beneﬁt of multi-threaded programming
to implement a separate thread to handle data acquisition from sensor subsystem and bu ering data
for 10 s and automatic segmenting this bu ered frame into an HS (S1-S2 epoch) segment; which was
used to calculate all the features in a separate thread and a dedicated classiﬁer thread was implemented
to classify the HS using the trained model. Both the recall and precision are reasonable for reliable
detection and this is true for both positive and negative classiﬁcation. Figure 19 shows the GUI showing
the data acquisition, segmentation, and classiﬁcation interface developed using python for real-time
classiﬁcation and tested using six normal and abnormal subjects.
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 21 
 
Figure 19. Graphical user interface for real-time HS classification using Python. 
In the current study, we have proposed a system where the acquisition system is based on 
miniature microcontroller with low-computational capability and not suitable for machine learning 
model deployment. Therefore, ML algorithm was implemented in the PC-based host system. In the 
current design, accuracy and performance of the classification model has no influence on the battery 
life of the acquisition system; however, of course, the system is not very compact because of the host 
system. However, the overall efficiency of the implemented algorithm was highly optimized for best 
performance with optimum parameters: Number of iteration, distance, and number of neighbors. It 
can be easily ascertained that current implementation takes the advantage of parallel processing and 
much faster than the deep learning techniques. 
5. Conclusions 
In this study, the authors have proposed and implemented a portable heart sound capturing 
system for real-time heart sound anomaly detection. The digital stethoscope was designed by 
modifying an analog stethoscope and adding an analog front end and miniaturized microcontroller 
with built-in BLE for digitization and transmission. By using this device, the user can keep track of 
his/her heart condition on a daily basis, at low cost. A public large imbalanced dataset was used to 
train and test the algorithm with 27 t-domain, f-domain, and MFCC features. The best-performing 
algorithms in terms of classification accuracy were reported with several other statistical performance 
measures. Feature reduction, hyperparameter optimization, along with asymmetrical cost 
assignment in the training of algorithm were evaluated to obtain best performance from the 
algorithms. It was observed that the optimized Ensemble algorithm can outperform all the trained 
algorithm in classifying the test data subset. The highest score of the PhysioNet-2016 challenge 
competition reported overall accuracy of 86.02%, whereas the work reported has achieved a higher 
accuracy of 94.63% (97% abnormal and 88% normal). The classification accuracies with the cost 
adjustment were found to be 97% and 88% for detecting abnormal HS and normal HS, respectively. 
In addition, the proposed smart-stethoscope is lower in terms of power consumption and, therefore, 
it is expected that the device can run for several days with a 320 mAh battery. In summary, the device 
can contribute to excellent health monitoring and improve personal care of cardiac patients at home 
in a completely noninvasive manner. In the future, we would like to make the smart-stethoscope 
more compact in size and more professional looking with an embedded decision-making unit to 
classify the HS on-board. The system might be modified to send the HS data to a smart phone using 
BLE interface, which can classify the HS signals real-time and display results on-screen interactively, 
which can be a new life-saving gadget. 
Author Contributions: Experiments were designed by M.E.H.C. and K.A. Experiments were performed and 
experimental data were acquired by S.M., M.E.H.C., A.M.T., and A.K. Data were analyzed by S.M., M.E.H.C., 
K.A., A.K., A.M.T., N.A.E. and M.B.I.R. All authors were involved in interpretation of data and paper writing. 
Figure 19. Graphical user interface for real-time HS classiﬁcation using Python.
In the current study, we have proposed a system where the acquisition system is based on miniature
microcontroller with low-computational capability and not suitable for machine learning model
deployment. Therefore, ML algorithm was implemented in the PC-based host system. In the current
design, accuracy and performance of the classiﬁcation model has no inﬂuence on the battery life
of the acquisition system; however, of course, the system is not very compact because of the host
system. However, the overall e ciency of the implemented algorithm was highly optimized for best
performance with optimum parameters: Number of iteration, distance, and number of neighbors.


===== PAGE 20 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 20 of 22
It can be easily ascertained that current implementation takes the advantage of parallel processing
and much faster than the deep learning techniques.
5. Conclusions
In this study, the authors have proposed and implemented a portable heart sound capturing
system for real-time heart sound anomaly detection. The digital stethoscope was designed by
modifying an analog stethoscope and adding an analog front end and miniaturized microcontroller
with built-in BLE for digitization and transmission. By using this device, the user can keep track of
his/her heart condition on a daily basis, at low cost. A public large imbalanced dataset was used to
train and test the algorithm with 27 t-domain, f-domain, and MFCC features. The best-performing
algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy were reported with several other statistical performance
measures. Feature reduction, hyperparameter optimization, along with asymmetrical cost assignment
in the training of algorithm were evaluated to obtain best performance from the algorithms. It was
observed that the optimized Ensemble algorithm can outperform all the trained algorithm in classifying
the test data subset. The highest score of the PhysioNet-2016 challenge competition reported overall
accuracy of 86.02%, whereas the work reported has achieved a higher accuracy of 94.63% (97% abnormal
and 88% normal). The classiﬁcation accuracies with the cost adjustment were found to be 97% and 88%
for detecting abnormal HS and normal HS, respectively. In addition, the proposed smart-stethoscope
is lower in terms of power consumption and, therefore, it is expected that the device can run for
several days with a 320 mAh battery. In summary, the device can contribute to excellent health
monitoring and improve personal care of cardiac patients at home in a completely noninvasive manner.
In the future, we would like to make the smart-stethoscope more compact in size and more professional
looking with an embedded decision-making unit to classify the HS on-board. The system might be
modiﬁed to send the HS data to a smart phone using BLE interface, which can classify the HS signals
real-time and display results on-screen interactively, which can be a new life-saving gadget.
Author Contributions: Experiments were designed by M.E.H.C. and K.A. Experiments were performed
and experimental data were acquired by S.M., M.E.H.C., A.M.T., and A.K. Data were analyzed by S.M., M.E.H.C.,
K.A., A.K., A.M.T., N.A.-E. and M.B.I.R. All authors were involved in interpretation of data and paper writing.
Funding: This research was partially funded by Qatar National Research Foundation (QNRF), grant number
UREP19-069-2-031 and UREP23-027-2-012 and Research University Grant AP-2017-008 /1. The publication of this
article was funded by the Qatar National Library.
Acknowledgments: Authors would like to Engr. Ahmed Zahran, Electrical Engineering, Qatar University for
helping the 3D printing of the system.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Moza arian, D.; Benjamin, E.J.; Go, A.S.; Arnett, D.K.; Blaha, M.J.; Cushman, M.; Das, S.R.; de Ferranti, S.;
Despr és, J.P .; Fullerton, H.J. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 update a report from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 2016 ,133, e38–e48. [PubMed]
2. Bhatnagar, P .; Wickramasinghe, K.; Williams, J.; Rayner, M.; Townsend, N. The epidemiology of cardiovascular
disease in the UK 2014. Heart 2015 ,101, 1182–1189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Nichols, M.; Peterson, K.; Herbert, J.; Alston, L.; Allender, S. Australian Heart Disease Statistics 2015 ; National Heart
Foundation of Australia: Melbourne, Australia, 2016.
4. Wilkins, E.; Wilson, L.; Wickramasinghe, K.; Bhatnagar, P .; Leal, J.; Luengo-Fernandez, R.; Burns, R.;
Rayner, M.; Townsend, N. European Cardiovascular Disease Statistics 2017 ; University of Bath: Bath, UK, 2017.
5. Reed, T.R.; Reed, N.E.; Fritzson, P . Heart sound analysis for symptom detection and computer-aided diagnosis.
Simul. Model. Pract. Theory 2004 ,12, 129–146. [CrossRef]
6. Kim, R.J.; Wu, E.; Rafael, A.; Chen, E.-L.; Parker, M.A.; Simonetti, O.; Klocke, F.J.; Bonow, R.O.; Judd, R.M.
The use of contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging to identify reversible myocardial dysfunction.
N. Engl. J. Med. 2000 ,343, 1445–1453. [CrossRef] [PubMed]


===== PAGE 21 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 21 of 22
7. Gao, M.; Huang, J.; Zhang, S.; Qian, Z.; Voros, S.; Metaxas, D.; Axel, L. 4D cardiac reconstruction using high
resolution CT images. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Functional Imaging and Modeling
of the Heart, New York, NY, USA, 25–27 May 2011; pp. 153–160.
8. Canè, F.; Verhegghe, B.; De Beule, M.; Bertrand, P .B.; Van der Geest, R.J.; Segers, P .; De Santis, G. From 4D
Medical Images (CT, MRI, and Ultrasound) to 4D Structured Mesh Models of the Left Ventricular Endocardium
for Patient-Speciﬁc Simulations. Biomed Res. Int. 2018 ,2018 , 7030718. [CrossRef]
9. Gaziano, T.A.; Bitton, A.; Anand, S.; Abrahams-Gessel, S.; Murphy, A. Growing epidemic of coronary heart
disease in low-and middle-income countries. Curr. Probl. Cardiol. 2010 ,35, 72–115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Roy, J.K.; Roy, T.S.; Mukhopadhyay, S.C. Heart Sound: Detection and Analytical Approach Towards Diseases.
InModern Sensing Technologies ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 103–145.
11. Hedayioglu, F.D.L. Heart Sound Segmentation for Digital Stethoscope Integration. Master’s Thesis, University
of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2011.
12. Leng, S.; San Tan, R.; Chai, K.T.C.; Wang, C.; Ghista, D.; Zhong, L. The electronic stethoscope.
Biomed. Eng. Online 2015 ,14, 66. [CrossRef]
13. Landge, K.; Kidambi, B.R.; Singhal, A.; Basha, A. Electronic stethoscopes: Brief review of clinical utility,
evidence, and future implications. J. Pract. Cardiovasc. Sci. 2018 ,4, 65. [CrossRef]
14. Silverman, B.; Balk, M. Digital Stethoscope—Improved Auscultation at the Bedside. Am. J. Cardiol. 2019 ,
123, 984–985. [CrossRef]
15. Reynolds, J.; Forero, J.; Botero, J.; Leguizam ón, V .; Ram írez, L.; Lozano, C. Electronic Stethoscope with
Wireless Communication to a Smart-phone, Including a Signal Filtering and Segmentation Algorithm of
Digital Phonocardiography Signals. In Proceedings of the VII Latin American Congress on Biomedical
Engineering CLAIB 2016, Bucaramanga, Colombia, 26–28 October 2016; pp. 553–556.
16. Swarup, S.; Makaryus, A.N. Digital stethoscope: Technology update. Med. Devices 2018 ,11, 29. [CrossRef]
17. T schannen, M.; Kramer, T.; Marti, G.; Heinzmann, M.; Wiatowski, T. Heart sound classification using deep structured
features. In Proceedings of the 2016 Computing in Cardiology Conference (CinC), V ancouver, BC, Canada,
11–14 September 2016; pp. 565–568.
18. Gupta, C.N.; Palaniappan, R.; Swaminathan, S.; Krishnan, S.M. Neural network classiﬁcation of homomorphic
segmented heart sounds. Appl. Soft Comput. 2007 ,7, 286–297. [CrossRef]
19. Noponen, A.-L.; Lukkarinen, S.; Angerla, A.; Sepponen, R. Phono-spectrographic analysis of heart murmur
in children. BMC Pediatr. 2007 ,7, 23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Lubaib, P .; Muneer, K.A. The heart defect analysis based on PCG signals using pattern recognition techniques.
Procedia Technol. 2016 ,24, 1024–1031. [CrossRef]
21. Abbas, A.K.; Bassam, R. Phonocardiography signal processing. Synth. Lect. Biomed. Eng. 2009 ,4, 1–194.
[CrossRef]
22. Marascio, G.; Modesti, P .A. Current trends and perspectives for automated screening of cardiac murmurs.
Heart Asia 2013 ,5, 213–218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Liu, C.; Springer, D.; Li, Q.; Moody, B.; Juan, R.A.; Chorro, F.J.; Castells, F.; Roig, J.M.; Silva, I.; Johnson, A.E.
An open access database for the evaluation of heart sound algorithms. Physiol. Meas. 2016 ,37, 2181.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Livanos, G.; Ranganathan, N.; Jiang, J. Heart sound analysis using the S transform. In Proceedings of
the Computers in Cardiology 2000, Cambridge, MA, USA, 24–27 September 2000; pp. 587–590.
25. Liang, H.; Lukkarinen, S.; Hartimo, I. Heart sound segmentation algorithm based on heart sound envelogram.
In Proceedings of the Computers in Cardiology 1997, Lund, Sweden, 7–10 September 1997; pp. 105–108.
26. Choi, S.; Jiang, Z. Comparison of envelope extraction algorithms for cardiac sound signal segmentation.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2008 ,34, 1056–1069. [CrossRef]
27. Mondal, A.; Bhattacharya, P .; Saha, G. An automated tool for localization of heart sound components S1, S2,
S3 and S4 in pulmonary sounds using Hilbert transform and Heron’s formula. SpringerPlus 2013 ,2, 512.
[CrossRef]
28. Cliord, G.D.; Liu, C.; Moody, B.; Springer, D.; Silva, I.; Li, Q.; Mark, R.G. Classiﬁcation of normal /abnormal
heart sound recordings: The PhysioNet /Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2016. In Proceedings of the 2016
Computing in Cardiology Conference (CinC), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11–14 September 2016; pp. 609–612.
29. Schmidt, S.E.; Holst-Hansen, C.; Hansen, J.; Toft, E.; Struijk, J.J. Acoustic features for the identiﬁcation of
coronary artery disease. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2015 ,62, 2611–2619. [CrossRef]


===== PAGE 22 =====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 2781 22 of 22
30. Davis, S.; Mermelstein, P . Comparison of parametric representations for monosyllabic word recognition in
continuously spoken sentences. IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. 1980 ,28, 357–366. [CrossRef]
31. Chauhan, S.; Wang, P .; Sing Lim, C.; Anantharaman, V . A computer aided MFCC-based HMM system for
automatic auscultation. Comput. Biol. Med. 2008 ,38, 221–233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Vepa, J. Classiﬁcation of heart murmurs using cepstral features and support vector machines. In Proceedings
of the 31st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, 3–6 September 2009; pp. 2539–2542.
33. Potes, C.; Parvaneh, S.; Rahman, A.; Conroy, B. Ensemble of Feature based and Deep learning-based
Classiﬁers for Detection of Abnormal Heart Sounds. In Proceedings of the Computing in Cardiology 2016,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11–14 September 2016.
34. Zabihi, M.; Rad, A.B.; Kiranyaz, S.; Gabbouj, M.; Katsaggelos, A.K. Heart Sound Anomaly and Quality
Detection using Ensemble of Neural Networks without Segmentation. In Proceedings of the Computing in
Cardiology 2016, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11–14 September 2016.
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).