

===== PAGE 1 =====
Academic Editors: Eliane Bodanese
and Grigoris Kaltsas
Received: 19 October 2024
Revised: 29 December 2024
Accepted: 30 December 2024
Published: 3 January 2025
Citation: Chuchnowska, I.; Białas, K.
Prototype of Self-Service Electronic
Stethoscope to Be Used by Patients
During Online Medical Consultations.
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s25010226
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Prototype of Self-Service Electronic Stethoscope to Be Used by
Patients During Online Medical Consultations
Iwona Chuchnowska1,*
and Katarzyna Białas2
1Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Roosevelta 40, 41-800 Zabrze, Poland
2Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Konarskiego 18A,
44-100 Gliwice, Poland; katarzyna.bialas@polsl.pl
*Correspondence: iwona.chuchnowska@polsl.pl
Abstract: This article presents the authors’ design of an electronic stethoscope intended
for use during online medical consultations for patient auscultation. The goal of the
project was to design an instrument that is durable, user-friendly, and affordable. Existing
electronic components were used to create the device and a traditional single-sided chest
piece. Three-dimensional printing technology was employed to manufacture the prototype.
Following the selection of the material, a static tensile strength test was conducted on the
printed samples as part of the pre-implementation investigations. Results: Tests on samples
made of PLA with a 50% hexagonal infill demonstrated a tensile strength of 36 MPa and
an elongation of 4–5%, which was deemed satisfactory for the intended application in
the stethoscope’s manufacture. The designed and manufactured electronic stethoscope
presented in the article can be connected to headphones or speakers, enabling remote
medical consultation. According to the opinion of doctors who tested it, it provides the
appropriate sound quality for auscultation. This stethoscope facilitates the rapid detection
and recognition of cardiac and respiratory activity in humans.
Keywords: electronic stethoscope; 3D printing; recognition; detection
1. Introduction
In lung diseases and cardiological conditions, the stethoscope is defined as ‘an instrument
allowing the listening to the sound/noise emitted by the body’. It has been an indispensable
diagnostic instrument for over two hundred years. Its contemporary form was patented in
the 1960s [ 1] and its less complicated predecessor in 1910 [ 2]. These facts do not exclude the
possibility of further search for more advanced and functional versions of the stethoscope.
Modifications relate not only to the details of individual parts of the instrument but also to the
system of operation and sound transmission. Apart from traditional mechanical stethoscopes
based on the transmission of analogue sound (in the form of acoustic waves), new types of
stethoscopes are designed by using digital sound transmission [ 3–5]. The conversion of sound
into a digital form enables the computer-aided analysis and processing of data in certain
software programmes, as well as their recording and transmission.
At the beginning of the year 2020, the necessity of isolation caused by the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic re-organized many areas of life and released creative potential to improve remote
forms of contact on different planes. Many companies were forced to shift into remote
working mode, which also partly affected the occupational group of physicians. Standard
medical check-ups that did not require very urgent direct contact with patients adopted
the form of medical online consultation. This fact, however, limited to some extent the
possibility of a full examination of the patient [6–8].
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 https://doi.org/10.3390/s25010226


===== PAGE 2 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 2 of 15
Medical examinations which previously required direct contact between the patient
and the doctor include standard auscultation using the stethoscope in the cases of sus-
pected lung or heart diseases (especially lung conditions require cyclic auscultation). More
often than not, in paediatrics, particularly in the initial phase of diseases, pathological
changes are impossible to hear; however, they require frequent examination and permanent
observation [ 9]. The development of contemporary technologies can lead to the reduction
in direct contact between the physician and patient down to a necessary minimum [10].
1.1. Project Objectives
The project aimed to create an auscultation device for the patient’s self-use during a
medical consultation online. The adopted assumptions prioritized the following aspects:
user-friendliness and affordability resulting from low production costs. To some extent, the
designed stethoscope makes use of the components of classical stethoscopes [11].
1.2. Structure of Traditional Stethoscopes
A traditional stethoscope consists of two basic parts, i.e., the chest piece (the head)
equipped with a diaphragm, whose task is to receive and transmit acoustic vibration from
the examined body area, and the headset with tubing transmitting acoustic waves to the
surface area of the tympanic membrane (eardrum) of the examining person’s ear.
The chest piece is usually made of metal–stainless steel, chromium-plated (covered
by a galvanic coating) brass, or aluminium subjected to electrochemical treatment. The
diaphragm (membrane) spread on the chest piece is responsible for the stethoscope’s
sensitivity. It is usually manufactured from plastics (e.g., epoxy foil reinforced with glass
fibre); however, there are also foils combining plastics with a metal foil made from bronze
alloys. Dual-sided chest pieces enjoy great popularity. They are equipped with a dual-
position rotation pin. They receive sounds through a diaphragm or a bell located on the
opposite side. Nevertheless, single-sided stethoscopes are also often in use and are usually
called anaesthesiological stethoscopes. They have a considerably lower chest piece, which
facilitates the placing of the instrument under the patient’s clothes.
The second part of the classical stethoscope includes the headset with tubing playing
a function of a waveguide guiding acoustic signals from the chest piece to the tympanic
membrane of the examining person. The tubing is made of elastic plastics. Stiff end pieces
(ear tubes) supported by binaural springs eliminate the necessity of holding up the ends
of the tubing (ear pieces) in the ears and guarantees the leak tightness of the acoustic duct.
Similar to the chest piece, the headset is made of stainless steel, chromium-plated brass, or
aluminium. Essential elements of the stethoscope are the ear pieces, which have an impact
on the minimization of noises caused by external background noise. Ear pieces or ear tips
are usually made in the form of soft elements self-adjusting to the shape of the ear. They are
made of elastic plastics (e.g., nitrile rubber), which prevents the loss of the acoustic signal [ 12].
1.3. Advantages and Disadvantages of Traditional Stethoscopes
Table 1 presents the advantages and disadvantages of using a traditional stethoscope,
highlighting its strengths and limitations in medical practice [10,13].
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of a traditional stethoscope.
Advantages Disadvantages
Traditional (doctors accustomed to using it) Cannot record or share audio
LightweightUncomfortable (headset = metal part of the
stethoscope can be uncomfortable; ear tips
are soft, but can cause discomfort or irritation)


===== PAGE 3 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 3 of 15
Table 1. Cont.
Advantages Disadvantages
Inexpensive Requires proper technique to avoid user errors
No dependence on batteries or power Only a professional can detect the disease
Unsuitable for hearing-impaired practitioners
Given the disadvantages, particularly the lack of remote capability, it is worth consid-
ering the design of an electronic stethoscope.
2. Materials and Methods
The project aimed to create an auscultation device for the patient’s self-use during a
medical consultation online. The adopted assumptions prioritized the following aspects:
user-friendliness and affordability resulting from low production costs. To some extent, the
designed stethoscope makes use of the components of classical stethoscopes.
2.1. Authors’ Design of Stethoscope
The presented design of the electronic stethoscope features a classical single-sided
chest piece, which is built in the designed main body of the device. The single-sided chest
piece was chosen due to the fact that it provides patients with easy self-service and an
affordable price. In addition, the chest piece of the stethoscope was incorporated directly
into the body of the designed device.
The electronic system, whose components are mounted inside the device body, is
responsible for sound transmission. The system consists of components which are widely
available on the market. It features a microcontroller, microphone, charging module,
battery (lithium-ion cell), micro-USB port, signal diode, switch, and jack socket enabling
the connection of headphones or loudspeakers. Among the various available components,
the ESP32 microcontroller with a dedicated converter from Adafruit, a company based in
the United States, was used.
The selection of this type was dictated by its relatively low power consumption.
As for the microphone, the SPH0645 model, manufactured by Adafruit from the United
States, operating with the I2S bus (Inter-IC Sound Bus) was used as a medium connect-
ing the microcontroller to the audio decoder [ 14]. The device is powered by a battery
(lithium-ion cell 18650 with a capacity of 3500 mAh) and equipped with a charge controller
(TP 4056 controller) for monitoring the voltage in order to protect the device against exces-
sive charging or discharging. All components responsible for stethoscope operation were
placed in the main body of the designed device in such a way to provide free access to
replaceable elements and prioritize the requirement of a small size of the device.
2.2. Design of Stethoscope Housing
The shape of the printed housing was adapted to the planned system of components.
The first thing which was designed in the central part of the main body was the fastening
of the main board (ESP32-38 Pines) controlling stethoscope operation (Figure 1).
In the pre-designing phase of the device housing, the following assumptions were
defined: The device main body should have a modular form, as such a structure enables
quick prototyping and the fast and comfortable assembling of the device and therefore
contributes to faster implementation of the model in serial production. The housing should
include a jack socket enabling the connection of headphones or loudspeakers, a switch, and
a micro-USB port, which enables the communication with a computer. The structure of the
housing must make it possible to replace the battery or to charge the storage battery. The


===== PAGE 4 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 4 of 15
model of the device housing was matched with previously selected electronic components,
which have been presented above.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16 
 
 
Figure 1. The CAD model of the fragment of the stethoscope housing with the main board fastening 
designed with Auto desk Inventor 2020. 
In the pre-designing phase of the device housing, the following assumptions were 
deﬁned: The device main body should have a modular form, as such a structure enables 
quick prototyping and the fast and comforta ble assembling of the device and therefore 
contributes to faster implementation of the model in serial production. The housing 
should include a jack socket enabling the connection of headphones or loudspeakers, a switch, and a micro-USB port, which enable s the communication with a computer. The 
structure of the housing must ma ke it possible to replace the ba ttery or to charge the stor-
age battery. The model of the device housing was matched with previously selected elec-
tronic components, which have been presented above. 
Taking into account the priority of device a ﬀordability, it was decided that the 3D 
printing method had to be used in the proce ss of building the stethoscope main body. The 
above-mentioned method consists in the generation of three-dimensional physical objects 
on the basis of a computer model. Initially, it was used for the quick prototyping of ele-
ments; nowadays, it ﬁnds numerous applications in many ﬁelds. More and more a ttention 
has been paid to the application of this method in medicine, not only to the construction 
of diagnostic tools, as it is the case here, but also in the scope of clinical use, such as the 
creation of implants [15–17]. The popularity of 3D printing technology is on the rise pro-portionally to the current fall in its prices and increased availability [18–20]. Among a 
wide assortment of patented 3D printing methods, such as SLS (Selective Laser Sintering), 
LFS (Low-Force Stereolithography), PolyJet, MJF (Multi-Jet Fusion), HSS (High-Speed Sintering), DLMS (Direct Metal Laser Sintering), and SBJ (Sand Binder Je tting), the FDM 
technology (Fused Deposition Modelling) was selected. FDM consists in the fabrication of 
three-dimensional forms by means of the deposi tion of layers of polymers fed through a 
heated nozzle [21]. The FDM technology was chosen because the printed elements are 
durable and suitable for building functional prototypes. Additionally, a wide range of 
thermoplastic materials can be used. Disadvan tages such as printing speed or the need 
for post-processing to obtain a smooth ﬁnish are not problematic in the case of our simple, 
small prototype [22,23]. 
Figure 1. The CAD model of the fragment of the stethoscope housing with the main board fastening
designed with Autodesk Inventor 2020.
Taking into account the priority of device affordability, it was decided that the 3D
printing method had to be used in the process of building the stethoscope main body.
The above-mentioned method consists in the generation of three-dimensional physical
objects on the basis of a computer model. Initially, it was used for the quick prototyping
of elements; nowadays, it finds numerous applications in many fields. More and more
attention has been paid to the application of this method in medicine, not only to the
construction of diagnostic tools, as it is the case here, but also in the scope of clinical use,
such as the creation of implants [ 15–17]. The popularity of 3D printing technology is on the
rise proportionally to the current fall in its prices and increased availability [ 18–20]. Among
a wide assortment of patented 3D printing methods, such as SLS (Selective Laser Sintering),
LFS (Low-Force Stereolithography), PolyJet, MJF (Multi-Jet Fusion), HSS (High-Speed
Sintering), DLMS (Direct Metal Laser Sintering), and SBJ (Sand Binder Jetting), the FDM
technology (Fused Deposition Modelling) was selected. FDM consists in the fabrication
of three-dimensional forms by means of the deposition of layers of polymers fed through
a heated nozzle [ 21]. The FDM technology was chosen because the printed elements are
durable and suitable for building functional prototypes. Additionally, a wide range of
thermoplastic materials can be used. Disadvantages such as printing speed or the need
for post-processing to obtain a smooth finish are not problematic in the case of our simple,
small prototype [22,23].
2.3. Analysis of Materials Used for Construction of Stethoscope Main Body
Three-dimensional printing makes use of thermoplastics with different properties.
The most popular materials applied in this method are as follows: ABS (acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene copolymer), ASA (acrylonitrile styrene acrylate), PLA (poly(lactide)),
PET-G (polyethylene terephthalate glycol copolymer), and nylon. The plastics (filaments)
GRIP , MediFlex, PET-G, and PLA could be used in the designed device. It was taken into


===== PAGE 5 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 5 of 15
consideration that the properties of the filaments would be directly related to the assurance
of the required strength parameters [19,20,24].
We planned to construct the housing of the device body from the material GRIP ,
belonging to a group of elastic TPU filaments (thermoplastic polyurethane elastomer),
which is characterized by high dynamic friction and minimum shrinkage. It is often used
for the manufacturing of soft-touch elements. This material is made from raw materials
complying with directive EU 10/2011 concerning materials intended to come into contact
with food and standard EN 71-3 related to the safety of toys [25,26].
The material MediFlex was also considered as an alternative, as it is characterized by
high resistance to commonly used methods of sterilization, such as steam, EtO, and Gamma
(25 kGy and 50 kGy); a wide range of working temperature of the polymer (from −50◦C to
125◦C); high mechanical strength; good chemical resistance—except for organic solvents
and oils (with which the designed device will not come into contact); high resistance to
weather conditions; and hardness 96 Shore A. The above-mentioned material is entirely
produced from raw materials used for medical devices—such products satisfy the standards
related to contact with food and the human body and even implantation.
Other elements of the device housing were designed to be made from the material
PET-G , which is characterized by high chemical resistance, high strength, and great trans-
parency. This material is produced from raw materials and dyes which are intended to
come into contact with food, in compliance with directive EU 10/2011 [ 25]. These raw
materials also meet the ISO 11607-1:2019 and ISO 10993 standards [27,28].
An alternative to PET-G is the material PLA (aliphatic polyester–polyactide), which
is very popular in the field of manufacturing medical products due to its compatibility.
Therefore, it is often used in stents, orthopaedic implants, tissue scaffolds, absorbable
surgical sutures, dressings, and other hygienic products (such as napkins or diapers).
PLA is characterized by high rigidity and small contraction, thanks to which it does not
require a heated table or a heating chamber in 3D printing. The printing with this material
is performed in relatively low temperatures—within the range from 190 to 220◦C. The
material shows quite good tensile strength. Its advantage is that it is recyclable, while
its drawback is that it has low resistance to temperature. However, in the case of the
designed device, the latter is not so important, as the other electronic components of the
device should not be subjected to intense heating either. The above-mentioned material is
manufactured in accordance with directive EU 10/2011 [25].
A thorough analysis of the utility of the above-mentioned materials constituted an
essential part of the project work, as we planned to make individual parts of the housing
of the designed stethoscope from those materials. Taking into account the specification
of particular materials, it was finally decided that the whole housing of the stethoscope
was to be made of PLA. The main factors contributing to this choice were the affordability
of the material, easy printing, and the properties enabling universal use of the product
in medicine.
2.4. Strength Tests
Within the framework of pre-implementation investigations, static tensile tests were
conducted on ten printed samples. In engineering practice, in the selection of a material
for a certain purpose, a method of uniaxial tension testing is used. Conducting a tensile
strength test on the printed samples of a printed stethoscope housing is crucial to assessing
whether the material and 3D printing technology meet the requirements of durability, safety,
and functionality of the medical device. The casing of the stethoscope is exposed to various
loads during use, e.g., pressure, stretching during manipulation, or accidental falls. The
tensile test ensures that the material will withstand everyday use. The 3D printing process


===== PAGE 6 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 6 of 15
can be performed with different fillings, which may cause defects such as microcracks,
layer weakening (delamination) or porosity. The tensile test allows you to assess whether
the printing parameters, such as the type of filling, temperature, or filling (percentages),
ensure adequate strength. This type of examination is frequently applied due to the fact
that such an experiment is easy to carry out and provides easy-to-calculate data on physical
properties specific to a given material. This type of test is broadly used to determine
material properties. The tests were performed in compliance with valid standards, PN-EN
ISO 527-1:2020-01 and PN-EN ISO 527-2:2012 [ 29,30]. Profiles subjected to testing had a flat,
‘paddle-like’ form and the following dimensions: a thickness of 4.0 ±0.2 mm, the width
of the part subjected to measurements of 10 ±0.2 mm, and a total length of more than
150 mm. Other important parameters are presented in Table 2.
Table 2. The printing parameters used.
Filling 50%
Type of filling Hexagonal
Table temperature 50 degrees Celsius
Head temperature 205 degrees Celsius
The tensile test was carried out on ten specimens, which had been printed one by one
by using the same 3D printer.
2.5. Construction of Stethoscope Housing
The main board (ESP32-38 Pines) was fixed by means of screws, enabling movable
fastening. On the one hand, this allows for quick and easy mounting; on the other hand, it
makes it possible to pull it out of the housing, for instance, in the case of replacement or
modification of the soldered joints. In addition, a sound amplifier was also mounted onto
the fastening of the main board.
A basket with a Li-ion cell 18650 was stuck onto the lower part of the main body. A
charging module was fixed to the upper wall of the housing by means of hot glue, directly
under the module of the main board (Figure 2).
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 16 
 
 strength test on the printed samples of a pr inted stethoscope housing is crucial to as-
sessing whether the material and 3D printing technology meet the requirements of dura-
bility, safety, and functionality of the medical device. The casing of the stethoscope is ex-posed to various loads during use, e.g., pressu re, stretching during manipulation, or acci-
dental falls. The tensile test ensures that the material will withstand everyday use. The 3D 
printing process can be performed with di ﬀerent ﬁllings, which may cause defects such 
as microcracks, layer weakening (delamination) or porosity. The tensile test allows you to 
assess whether the printing parameters, such as the type of ﬁlling, temperature, or ﬁlling 
(percentages), ensure adequate strength. This type of examination is frequently applied due to the fact that such an experiment is ea sy to carry out and provides easy-to-calculate 
data on physical properties speci ﬁc to a given material. This type of test is broadly used 
to determine material properties. The test s were performed in compliance with valid 
standards, PN-EN ISO 527-1:2020-01 and PN-EN ISO 527-2:2012 [29,30]. Pro ﬁles subjected 
to testing had a ﬂat, ‘paddle-like’ form and the following dimensions: a thickness of 4.0 ± 
0.2 mm, the width of the part subjected to meas urements of 10 ± 0.2 mm, and a total length 
of more than 150 mm. Other important parameters are presented in Table 2. 
Table 2. The printing parameters used. 
Filling 50% 
Type of filling Hexagonal 
Table temperature 50 degrees Celsius 
Head temperature 205 degrees Celsius 
The tensile test was carried out on ten specimens, which had been printed one by one 
by using the same 3D printer. 
2.5. Construction of Stethoscope Housing 
The main board (ESP32-38 Pines) was ﬁxed by means of screws, enabling movable 
fastening. On the one hand, this allows for quick and easy mounting; on the other hand, 
it makes it possible to pull it out of the housing, for instance, in the case of replacement or 
modi ﬁcation of the soldered joints. In addition, a sound ampli ﬁer was also mounted onto 
the fastening of the main board. 
A basket with a Li-ion cell 18650 was stuck onto the lower part of the main body. A 
charging module was ﬁxed to the upper wall of the housin g by means of hot glue, directly 
under the module of the main board (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. CAD model of stethoscope assembly de signed with Autodesk Inventor 2020. 
Figure 2. CAD model of stethoscope assembly designed with Autodesk Inventor 2020.
Such a position enables a micro-USB port to be located on the rear wall of the device
main body. Next to the micro-USB port, on the rear wall, there is a diode, which signalizes
the process of charging the battery and the end of the process. There is also a switch, and a
jack fixed to the housing with a dedicated nut (Figure 3).
A microphone was fastened to the stethoscope chest piece by means of glue, which
reinforced the sealing of the auscultation canal, improved the sound quality, and reduced
external noise. The chest piece was mounted, also using glue, on the front wall of the
device housing. Individual electronic elements were soldered together. Such a solution


===== PAGE 7 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 7 of 15
makes it possible to avoid failures related to the accidental disconnection or loosening of
the components. The fact that soldered joints prevail over ‘gold pin’ joints contributes to the
reduction in the device dimensions. The front and rear walls were fixed to the central part
of the device main body with screws. Such a solution enables access to the internal structure
of the device and enhances its durability. All elements of the main body were printed by
using the printer Gembird FlashForge Guider 2S and the material PLA manufactured by
Noctuo from Gliwice, Poland. The housing shown in Figure 3 was fastened by using screws
and sealed with glue. Thanks to the application of the glue, a more solid construction was
achieved, which meets the requirements in the scope of the device’s proper functioning.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 Such a position enables a micro-USB port to be located on the rear wall of the device 
main body. Next to the micro-USB port, on the rear wall, there is a diode, which signalizes 
the process of charging the ba ttery and the end of the process. There is also a switch, and 
a jack ﬁxed to the housing with a dedicated nut (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Electronic remote stethoscope (controlling side). 
A microphone was fastened to the stethoscope chest piece by means of glue, which 
reinforced the sealing of the auscultation canal, improved the sound quality, and reduced 
external noise. The chest piece was mounted, also using glue, on the front wall of the de-
vice housing. Individu al electronic elements were soldered together. Such a solution 
makes it possible to avoid failures related to the accidental disconnection or loosening of 
the components. The fact that soldered joints prevail over ‘gold pin’ joints contributes to 
the reduction in the device dimensions. The front and rear walls were ﬁxed to the central 
part of the device main body with screws. Su ch a solution enables a ccess to the internal 
structure of the device and enhances its dura bility. All elements of the main body were 
printed by using the printer Gembird FlashFor ge Guider 2S and the material PLA manu-
factured by Noctuo from Gliwice, Poland. The housing shown in Figure 3 was fastened 
by using screws and sealed with glue. Thanks to the application of the glue, a more solid 
construction was achieved, which meets the re quirements in the scope of the device’s 
proper functioning. 
3. Results 
The designed housing of the stethoscope cons ists merely of four parts. The shape and 
structure of the interior of the main body ar e adapted to achieve the quick mounting of all 
necessary components. The housing structure also enables the modular assembly of the 
device at several workstations, which al so speeds up the manufacturing process. 
The minimization of the production costs of the stethoscope was achieved by the ap-
plication of existing electronic components and 3D printing. The adopted FDM 3D print-
ing technology enables quick and inexpensive prototyping. The reduction in manufactur-
ing costs in this scope also results from the shortening of the time necessary to produce a 
given element [31]. 
The tensile test was carried out on ten PLA specimens, which had been printed one 
by one by using the same 3D printe r (Gembird FlashForge Guider 2S). 
The results are presented in Table 3. 
Figure 3. Electronic remote stethoscope (controlling side).
3. Results
The designed housing of the stethoscope consists merely of four parts. The shape and
structure of the interior of the main body are adapted to achieve the quick mounting of all
necessary components. The housing structure also enables the modular assembly of the
device at several workstations, which also speeds up the manufacturing process.
The minimization of the production costs of the stethoscope was achieved by the ap-
plication of existing electronic components and 3D printing. The adopted FDM 3D printing
technology enables quick and inexpensive prototyping. The reduction in manufacturing costs in
this scope also results from the shortening of the time necessary to produce a given element [ 31].
The tensile test was carried out on ten PLA specimens, which had been printed one by
one by using the same 3D printer (Gembird FlashForge Guider 2S).
The results are presented in Table 3.
On the basis of the conducted tests, it can be stated that the tensile strength of the
sample with 50% hexagonal filling reaches almost 36 MPa. The elongation of the samples
oscillates between 4 and 5%. Comparable values of the results from all 10 tests indicate
that the investigations were carried out in a proper way. The PLA specification sheets
issued by individual manufacturers assure that the tensile strength values of the material
comply with the ASTM D882 standard [ 20] for injection samples (i.e., with 100% filling)
at the level of 50–60 MPa (e.g., Finnotech: 53 MPa; Noctuo: 60 Mpa) [ 32–34]. At the same
time, manufacturers warn that the declared values do not guarantee safety, and users must
conduct all necessary tests and verify analyses themselves in order to confirm the safety
compliance of the final products. However, such values constitute a point of reference,
on the basis of which one can state that the obtained mean value of tensile strength in
the case of samples filled up to 50% amounting to 35.89 MPa is satisfactory and sufficient.


===== PAGE 8 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 8 of 15
Therefore, it is a clear indication that such a material can be used in the implementation of
the designed stethoscope.
Table 3. Results of tensile tests conducted on 10 samples printed with FDM method by using
PLA filament.
Test σx1 σM εM σB εB h b A 0
MPa MPa % MPa % mm mm mm2
Test 1 34.65 36.01 3.75 21.64 5.62 4.11 10.36 42.08
Test 2 33.24 34.54 3.47 20.98 4.65 4.15 10.14 42.08
Test 3 34.29 36.25 3.53 21.05 5.08 4.12 10.23 42.14
Test 4 32.028 35.95 3.70 20.08 4.92 4.15 10.26 42.58
Test 5 32.52 35.81 3.49 21.00 4.46 4.13 10.24 42.29
Test 6 31.17 36.59 3.53 22.36 5.44 4.14 10.16 42.06
Test 7 28.66 35.81 3.47 21.18 4.68 4.18 10.22 42.71
Test 8 29.18 35.89 3.42 20.80 4.83 4.11 10.19 41.88
Test 9 32.28 35.78 3.48 20.48 4.50 4.12 10.26 42.27
Test 10 28.97 36.21 3.36 22.06 4.39 4.11 10.26 42.16
Mean value 31.70 35.89 3.52 21.16 4.86 4.13 10.23 42.23
Above, the following apply: σx1—stress at elongation x1%. σM—tensile strength. εM—relative elongation at
maximum tensile stress. σB—stress at rupture. εB—total elongation/relative elongation at rupture. h—thickness
of ‘paddle-like’ sample. b—width of part subjected to measurements. A 0—surface of initial cross-section of
measurement sample segment.
It is worth comparing the above-mentioned values with the results of tests carried
out on samples with 100% filling presented by Miazio, which reveal that in the case of the
sample with complete filling, the tensile strength σMamounted to 53 MPa [ 35]. This result
is comparable with the results obtained in the tests performed by Raja et al., where the
values from five tests were 47.55, 50.23, 48.56, 49.02, and 47.95 MPa, producing the mean
value of 48.66 MPa [36].
Taking into consideration the fact that the samples which were to be used in tensile
strength tests were printed with 50% filling, the obtained mean result at a level of 36 MPa
should be deemed satisfactory in comparison with the tests performed on samples with
100% filling. The value of strength depends to a considerable degree on the type and degree
of filling and substantially increases above 70%. The mechanical properties of the material
do not constitute an obstacle to its application in the production of the main body of the
designed stethoscope.
The designed and manufactured housing meets the requirements which were initially
assumed. The device has a small size (5 ×6×10.7 cm) and weighs 206 g. The housing
ensures proper position and distribution of the individual elements inside the device. This
enables comfortable use and possible modifications of the device. The stethoscope can be
placed in the pocket of a doctor’s coat. The stethoscope can be used in a similar way to a tra-
ditional device, but the auscultatory sounds are transmitted through headphones (Figure 4) .
The doctor can choose headphones tailored to their individual needs and preferences.
The stethoscope features charging inputs, a switch, and communication inputs, such
as headphones, external loudspeakers, and a micro-USB port enabling communication with
the computer.
The stethoscope enables the conduction of remote examinations, facilitating auscultation
from a distance, particularly in situations where in-person consultations are not feasible (Figure 5).


===== PAGE 9 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 9 of 15
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 enables comfortable use and possible modi ﬁcations of the device. The stethoscope can be 
placed in the pocket of a doctor’s coat. The stethoscope can be used in a similar way to a 
traditional device, but the auscultatory sounds are transmi tted through headphones (Fig-
ure 4). The doctor can choose headphones tailored to their individual needs and prefer-
ences. 
 
Figure 4. Electronic remote stethoscope (auscultation side). 
The stethoscope features charging inputs, a switch, and communication inputs, such 
as headphones, external loudspeakers, and a micro-USB port enabling communication 
with the computer. 
The stethoscope enables the conduction of remote examinations, facilitating auscul-
tation from a distance, particularly in situ ations where in-person consultations are not 
feasible. (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Tele-advice. 
The stethoscope is relatively straightforw ard to use; however, improper placement 
of the chest piece equipped with a diaphragm on the body, excessive or insu ﬃcient pres-
sure, or selecting an incorrect auscultation site can lead to inaccurate results. Nevertheless, 
this procedure can be conducted under the su pervision of a physician who, via a camera, 
can observe the process and provide guidance on how to position the device correctly 
(Figure 5). 
The examination can be performed at any time, allowing for frequent assessments as 
needed (Figure 6). 
Figure 4. Electronic remote stethoscope (auscultation side).
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 enables comfortable use and possible modi ﬁcations of the device. The stethoscope can be 
placed in the pocket of a doctor’s coat. The stethoscope can be used in a similar way to a 
traditional device, but the auscultatory sounds are transmi tted through headphones (Fig-
ure 4). The doctor can choose headphones tailored to their individual needs and prefer-
ences. 
 
Figure 4. Electronic remote stethoscope (auscultation side). 
The stethoscope features charging inputs, a switch, and communication inputs, such 
as headphones, external loudspeakers, and a micro-USB port enabling communication 
with the computer. 
The stethoscope enables the conduction of remote examinations, facilitating auscul-
tation from a distance, particularly in situ ations where in-person consultations are not 
feasible. (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Tele-advice. 
The stethoscope is relatively straightforw ard to use; however, improper placement 
of the chest piece equipped with a diaphragm on the body, excessive or insu ﬃcient pres-
sure, or selecting an incorrect auscultation site can lead to inaccurate results. Nevertheless, 
this procedure can be conducted under the su pervision of a physician who, via a camera, 
can observe the process and provide guidance on how to position the device correctly 
(Figure 5). 
The examination can be performed at any time, allowing for frequent assessments as 
needed (Figure 6). 
Figure 5. Tele-advice.
The stethoscope is relatively straightforward to use; however, improper placement of
the chest piece equipped with a diaphragm on the body, excessive or insufficient pressure,
or selecting an incorrect auscultation site can lead to inaccurate results. Nevertheless, this
procedure can be conducted under the supervision of a physician who, via a camera, can
observe the process and provide guidance on how to position the device correctly (Figure 5).
The examination can be performed at any time, allowing for frequent assessments
as needed (Figure 6).
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
Figure 6. An examination using a stethoscope. 
The sounds detected during auscultation can be recorded, enabling detailed subse-
quent analysis and facilitating consultation with other specialists. By translating auditory 
data into a visual format, spectrograms (Figures 7–9) allow physicians to make more in-formed decisions and contribute to improved patient outcomes in care. Additionally, the 
ability to visualize the sound waveforms aids in more precise interpretation (Figures 7–
9). 
The physician can review the recorded audio later, allowing for thorough interpreta-
tion and, if necessary, consultation with a se cond specialist. These recordings can also be 
stored in the patient’s medical records, enabling longitudinal comparisons and the track-ing of changes over time. Changes in sound pa tterns over time can be tracked, providing 
valuable insights into disease progression or the e ﬀectiveness of treatments. 
 
Figure 7. The spectrogram of a healthy lung. 
In the ﬁrst spectrogram (Figure 7), we observe normal vesicular breath sounds. This 
type of sound is associated with healthy lung fu nction, where air ﬂows freely through the 
airways into the alveoli. The even and consistent pa tterns of the spectrogram con ﬁrm the 
absence of any pathological changes in the respiratory activity. On the spectrogram of 
healthy lungs, it is possible to distinguish between the inhalation and exhalation phases 
of breathing. These phases are clearly visible as separate segments of the sound pa ttern, 
Figure 6. An examination using a stethoscope.


===== PAGE 10 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 10 of 15
The sounds detected during auscultation can be recorded, enabling detailed subse-
quent analysis and facilitating consultation with other specialists. By translating auditory
data into a visual format, spectrograms (Figures 7–9) allow physicians to make more in-
formed decisions and contribute to improved patient outcomes in care. Additionally, the
ability to visualize the sound waveforms aids in more precise interpretation (Figures 7–9).
The physician can review the recorded audio later, allowing for thorough interpretation
and, if necessary, consultation with a second specialist. These recordings can also be stored
in the patient’s medical records, enabling longitudinal comparisons and the tracking of
changes over time. Changes in sound patterns over time can be tracked, providing valuable
insights into disease progression or the effectiveness of treatments.
In the first spectrogram (Figure 7), we observe normal vesicular breath sounds. This
type of sound is associated with healthy lung function, where air flows freely through the
airways into the alveoli. The even and consistent patterns of the spectrogram confirm the
absence of any pathological changes in the respiratory activity. On the spectrogram of
healthy lungs, it is possible to distinguish between the inhalation and exhalation phases of
breathing. These phases are clearly visible as separate segments of the sound pattern, with
inhalation typically appearing as a smoother, more continuous sound and exhalation being
slightly shorter and less intense. The spectrogram demonstrates a rhythmic and regular
pattern, reflecting the natural, cyclical nature of normal breathing. This rhythmicity and the
clear distinction between phases are key indicators of healthy lung function, confirming
the absence of abnormalities in airflow.
The second spectrogram depicts fine crackles, which are discontinuous sounds often
associated with pathological conditions such as pneumonia.
The recorded audio can be reviewed by the physician at a later time, allowing for
thorough interpretation and, if necessary, consultation with a second specialist.
The spectrogram of the heartbeat shows a normal result. The sound waves exhibit a
distinct and regular rhythm, typical of healthy heart function, which verifies the device’s
accuracy and correct performance. (Figure 9)
The spectrogram allows clinicians to detect specific frequency patterns that correspond
to different pathological conditions. The spectrogram provides quantifiable data, such as
the duration, frequency range, and intensity of lung or heart sounds. This helps to stan-
dardize diagnoses and reduce variability among practitioners. Spectrograms offer a visual
representation of sounds, making them a tool for tutoring medical students and trainees.
They help bridge the gap between theoretical knowledge and practical auscultation skills.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
Figure 6. An examination using a stethoscope. 
The sounds detected during auscultation can be recorded, enabling detailed subse-
quent analysis and facilitating consultation with other specialists. By translating auditory 
data into a visual format, spectrograms (Figures 7–9) allow physicians to make more in-formed decisions and contribute to improved patient outcomes in care. Additionally, the 
ability to visualize the sound waveforms aids in more precise interpretation (Figures 7–
9). 
The physician can review the recorded audio later, allowing for thorough interpreta-
tion and, if necessary, consultation with a se cond specialist. These recordings can also be 
stored in the patient’s medical records, enabling longitudinal comparisons and the track-ing of changes over time. Changes in sound pa tterns over time can be tracked, providing 
valuable insights into disease progression or the e ﬀectiveness of treatments. 
 
Figure 7. The spectrogram of a healthy lung. 
In the ﬁrst spectrogram (Figure 7), we observe normal vesicular breath sounds. This 
type of sound is associated with healthy lung fu nction, where air ﬂows freely through the 
airways into the alveoli. The even and consistent pa tterns of the spectrogram con ﬁrm the 
absence of any pathological changes in the respiratory activity. On the spectrogram of 
healthy lungs, it is possible to distinguish between the inhalation and exhalation phases 
of breathing. These phases are clearly visible as separate segments of the sound pa ttern, 
Figure 7. The spectrogram of a healthy lung.


===== PAGE 11 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 11 of 15
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 16 
 
 with inhalation typically appearing as a smoother, more continuous sound and exhalation 
being slightly shorter and less intense. The spectrogram demonstrates a rhythmic and reg-
ular pattern, re ﬂecting the natural, cyclical nature of normal breathing. This rhythmicity 
and the clear distinction between phases are key indicators of healthy lung function, con-
ﬁrming the absence of abnormalities in air ﬂow. 
The second spectrogram depicts ﬁne crackles, which are discontinuous sounds often 
associated with pathological conditions such as pneumonia. 
 
Figure 8. A spectrogram showing pathological change s during the auscultation of the lungs. 
The recorded audio can be reviewed by the physician at a later time, allowing for 
thorough interpretation and, if necessary, consultation with a second specialist. 
The spectrogram of the heartbeat shows a normal result. The sound waves exhibit a 
distinct and regular rhythm, typical of healthy heart function, which veri ﬁes the device’s 
accuracy and correct pe rformance. (Figure 9) 
 
Figure 9. The spectrogram of the heartbeat. 
The spectrogram allows clinicians to detect speci ﬁc frequency pa tterns that corre-
spond to di ﬀerent pathological conditions. The spectrogram provides quanti ﬁable data, 
Figure 8. A spectrogram showing pathological changes during the auscultation of the lungs.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 16 
 
 with inhalation typically appearing as a smoother, more continuous sound and exhalation 
being slightly shorter and less intense. The spectrogram demonstrates a rhythmic and reg-
ular pattern, re ﬂecting the natural, cyclical nature of normal breathing. This rhythmicity 
and the clear distinction between phases are key indicators of healthy lung function, con-
ﬁrming the absence of abnormalities in air ﬂow. 
The second spectrogram depicts ﬁne crackles, which are discontinuous sounds often 
associated with pathological conditions such as pneumonia. 
 
Figure 8. A spectrogram showing pathological change s during the auscultation of the lungs. 
The recorded audio can be reviewed by the physician at a later time, allowing for 
thorough interpretation and, if necessary, consultation with a second specialist. 
The spectrogram of the heartbeat shows a normal result. The sound waves exhibit a 
distinct and regular rhythm, typical of healthy heart function, which veri ﬁes the device’s 
accuracy and correct pe rformance. (Figure 9) 
 
Figure 9. The spectrogram of the heartbeat. 
The spectrogram allows clinicians to detect speci ﬁc frequency pa tterns that corre-
spond to di ﬀerent pathological conditions. The spectrogram provides quanti ﬁable data, 
Figure 9. The spectrogram of the heartbeat.
4. Discussion
The above-described stethoscope, executed within the framework of this project, was
checked by a physician with a medical licence. The device features high sensitivity, which
is a condition for making a good diagnosis. By using a jack, the device may be connected to
loudspeakers or headphones, which allows for the adjustment of the sound volume. It is
also possible to improve the sound quality by increasing the frequency of sampling, e.g., to
studio sound quality (44.1 kHz), by mounting a more expensive microphone model.
Each visit to a care institution (hospital or health clinic) is a consequence of the patient’s
discomfort and stress. More and more attention is paid to the impact of home treatment on
the psyche and faster recovery of patients [ 37–39]. Home convalescence often involves the
patient using easy-to-use medical tools. Therefore, the use of the stethoscope presented
in the article, which could reduce visits to health centres, seems to be a valuable solution.
The use of medical instruments at home and their operation by patients themselves is
becoming an increasingly common and desirable phenomenon (in addition to the factors
mentioned above, also due to the age structure of society). The organisation of remote
technical assistance (personal and virtual) is related to their service [40,41].


===== PAGE 12 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 12 of 15
There are many electronic stethoscopes that can be improved. It is important that they
can be introduced into wide production. It is essential that the product implemented on
the market is easy to use for the people who are to use it. This can improve diagnostics
through accuracy and the ability to record and compare sounds [ 4]. Research is also being
conducted into the possibility of using higher-quality microphones [42].
5. Conclusions
As a result of the presented process of designing and manufacturing an electronic
stethoscope, we created a device designed for the remote diagnosis of lung and heart dis-
eases. In its construction, we used existing electronic components, a classical single-sided
chest piece, an on/off switch, a charging input, communication ports, and sockets to enable
the connection and communication of speakers and headphones with a computer. The
modular designed and manufactured form of the body in which they are housed ensures
the rapid prototyping and quick and convenient assembly of the device. Strength tests
carried out on PLA, static tensile tests, confirmed the suitability of this material for the
intended purpose. The design of the housing, the layout of the individual components of
the device, the way in which they are attached and joined together, ensures user comfort.
The communication ports provide various possibilities for using the device both for direct
examination (by the doctor) and for remote consultation. Another important advantage
provided by the device is the ability to record the sounds detected during the examination,
which allows for detailed analysis at a later date and facilitates consultation with other
specialists. In addition, the recorded audio data can be converted into a visual format
(spectrogram), as presented in the article. The visualization of the audio waveforms is
helpful for a more precise interpretation of the auscultation results. The main achievements
of the work include the design of a stethoscope with empirically proven high sensitivity,
capable of accurately capturing sounds and providing the ability to connect to external
devices such as loudspeakers or headphones to adjust volume and improve sound quality.
The designed stethoscope fulfils the adopted initial design assumptions placing among the
priorities affordable production costs, ease of use of the device by nonmedical people, and
provision of data transfer capabilities. The design of the device responds to the increasing
need for and popularity of remote medical consultations. To improve device design, a
wireless data flow and automatic data recording and storing may be used. However, the
main objective of this project was to construct a stethoscope device enabling the auscul-
tation of the patient during a medical online consultation, which has been achieved. The
affordability of the device was one of the chief factors taken into consideration, hence
the priority of a maximum reduction in manufacturing costs. The possibility of remote
auscultation of the patient in the diagnostic process greatly facilitates the physician’s work
and is a comfortable option for the patient. The stethoscope enables the remote monitoring
of health conditions, facilitating the non-invasive diagnosis and accurate detection of vital
functions and the rapid detection of abnormalities.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology , formal analysis, visualization, and writing—ori-
ginal draft preparation I.C.; validation, resources, investigation, data curation, and writing—review
and editing, K.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Silesian University of Technology under “Involving students in
scientific research through student research clubs and project-oriented teaching”, in connection with
the participation of Silesian University of Technology in the “Excellence Initiative—Research Univer-
sity” program, grant number 31/010/SDU20/0006-10. The Article Processing Charge was financed
under the European Funds for the Silesia 2021–2027 Program co-financed by the Just Transition Fund
project entitled “Development of the Silesian biomedical engineering potential in the face of the
challenges of the digital and green economy (BioMeDiG)”, project number FESL.10.25-IZ.01-07G5/23.


===== PAGE 13 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 13 of 15
Institutional Review Board Statement: According to our University Ethical Statement, the following
shall be regarded as research requiring a favourable opinion from the Ethics Commission in the
case of human research (based on a document in Polish: https://prawo.polsl.pl/Lists/Monitor/
Attachments/7291/M.2021.501.Z.107.pdf (accessed on 25 May 2023)): Research in which persons
with limited capacity to provide informed consent or research on persons whose capacity to provide
informed or free consent to participate in research and who have a limited ability to refuse research
before or during its implementation, in particular, children and adolescents under 12 years of age;
persons with intellectual disabilities; persons whose consent to participate in the research may not
be fully voluntary, including prisoners, soldiers, police officers, and employees of companies (when
the survey is conducted at their workplace); and persons who agree to participate in the research on
the basis of false information about the purpose and course of the research (masking instruction, i.e.,
deception) or do not know at all that they are subjects (in so-called natural experiments). Research in
which persons particularly susceptible to psychological trauma and mental health disorders are to
participate, in particular, mentally ill persons; victims of disasters, war trauma, etc.; patients receiving
treatment for psychotic disorders; and family members of terminally or chronically ill patients.
Research involving active intervention in human behaviour aimed at changing that behaviour
without direct intervention in the functioning of the brain, e.g., cognitive training, psychotherapy,
and psychocorrection (this also applies if the intervention is intended to benefit the subject (e.g.,
to improve his/her memory)). Research concerning controversial issues (e.g., abortion, in vitro
fertilization, the death penalty) or requiring particular delicacy and caution (e.g., concerning religious
beliefs or attitudes towards minority groups). Research that is prolonged, tiring, or physically or
mentally exhausting. Our research was not conducted on humans meeting the abovementioned
conditions. None of the participants had a limited capacity to provide informed consent, were
susceptible to psychological trauma, or had mental health disorders, and the research did not concern
any of the abovementioned controversial issues and was not prolonged, tiring, or physically or
mentally exhausting.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study .
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Littmann, D. Stethoscope. US Patent 3,108,652, 29 October 1963.
2. Fuchs, N. Stethoscope. US Patent 965,174, 26 July 1910.
3. Jamar, K.; Scherer, M.; Weis, T.; Anderson, M. Electronic Stethoscope, University of Wisconsin–Madison, BME Design Projects
2011. Available online: https://bmedesign.engr.wisc.edu/projects/f11/stethoscope/file/view/c2598148-edc1-4bdc-ab1b-cc9
62ea09129/Final%20Paper.pdf (accessed on 23 August 2021).
4. Leng, S.; Tan, R.S.; Chai, K.T.C.; Wang, C.; Ghista, D.; Zhong, L. The electronic stethoscope. BioMed. Eng. OnLine 2015 ,14, 66.
[CrossRef]
5. Swarup, S.; Makaryus, A.N. Digital stethoscope: Technology update. Med. Devices Evid. Res. 2018 ,11, 29–36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Haleem, A.; Javaid, M.; Singh, R.P .; Suman, R. Telemedicine for healthcare: Capabilities, features, barriers, and applications. Sens.
Int.2021 ,2, 100117. [CrossRef] [PubMed] [PubMed Central]
7. Simeone, S.; Condit, D.; Nadler, E. Do Not Give Up Your Stethoscopes Yet—Telemedicine for Chronic Respiratory Diseases in the
Era of COVID-19. Life2022 ,12, 222. [CrossRef]
8. Lakhe, A.; Sodhi, I.; Warrier, J.; Sinha, V . Development of digital stethoscope for telemedicine. J. Med. Eng. Technol. 2016 ,40, 20–24.
[CrossRef]
9. Lovrenski, J.; Petrovi´ c, S.; Balj-Barbir, S.; Joki´ c, R.; Vilotijevi´ c-Dautovi´ c, G. Stethoscope vs. ultrasound probe-which is more reliable
in children with suspected pneumonia? Acta Medica Acad. 2016 ,45, 39–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Seah, J.J.; Zhao, J.; Wang, D.Y.; Lee, H.P . Review on the Advancements of Stethoscope Types in Chest Auscultation. Diagnostics
2023 ,13, 1545. [CrossRef]
11. Wu, Y.-C.; Han, C.-C.; Chang, C.-S.; Chang, F.-L.; Chen, S.-F.; Shieh, T.-Y.; Chen, H.-M.; Lin, J.-Y. Development of an Electronic
Stethoscope and a Classification Algorithm for Cardiopulmonary Sounds. Sensors 2022 ,22, 4263. [CrossRef]
12. Packard, T.J. Compressible Ear Tip. US Patent 4,852,684, 1 August 1989.


===== PAGE 14 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 14 of 15
13. Kalinauskien ˙e, E.; Razvadauskas, H.; Morse, D.J.; Maxey, G.E.; Naudži ¯unas, A. A Comparison of Electronic and Traditional
Stethoscopes in the Heart Auscultation of Obese Patients. Medicina (Kaunas) 2019 ,55, 94. [CrossRef] [PubMed] [PubMed Central]
14. Ciarkowski, A.; Kulesza, M. Zastosowanie kontroler ów strumieniowych USB do budowy dedykowanych interfejs ów
d´ zwi˛ ekowych. Zesz. Nauk. Wydziału Elektrotechniki I Autom. Politech. Gda´ nskiej 2004 ,20, 17–22.
15. Poologasundarampillai, G.; Nommeots-Nomm, A. Materials for 3D printing in medicine: Metals, polymers, ceramics, hydrogels.
In3D Printing in Medicine ; Kalaska, D.M., Ed.; Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, UK, 2017; pp. 43–71. [CrossRef]
16. Yan, Q.; Dong, H.; Su, J.; Han, J.; Song, B.; Wei, Q.; Shi, Y. A Review of 3D Printing Technology for Medical Applications.
Engineering 2018 ,4, 729–742. [CrossRef]
17. Zhou, H.; Bhaduri, S.B. 3D Printing in the Research and Development of Medical Devices, Biomaterials in Translational Medicine,
A Biomaterials Approach. In Woodhead Publishing Series in Biomaterials ; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019; pp. 269–289.
[CrossRef]
18. Tomasello, F.; Conti, A.; La Torre, D. 3D Printing in Neurosurgery. World Neurosurg. 2016 ,91, 633–634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Zuñiga, J.; Moscoso, M.; Padilla-Huamantinco, P .G.; Lazo-Porras, M.; Tenorio-Mucha, J.; Padilla-Huamantinco, W.; Tincopa, J.P .
Development of 3D-Printed Orthopedic Insoles for Patients with Diabetes and Evaluation with Electronic Pressure Sensors.
Designs 2022 ,6, 95. [CrossRef]
20. Ballest ín-Bernad, V .; Artal-Sevil, J.S.; Dom ínguez-Navarro, J.A. Prototype of a Two-Phase Axial-Gap Transverse Flux Generator
Based on Reused Components and 3D Printing. Energies 2023 ,16, 1594. [CrossRef]
21. Shahrubudina, N.; Leea, T.C.; Ramlan, R. An Overview on 3D Printing Technology: Technological. Mater. Appl. Procedia Manuf.
2019 ,35, 1286–1296.
22. Ngo, T.D.; Kashani, A.; Imbalzano, G.; Nguyen, K.T.; Hui, D. Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of materials,
methods, applications and challenges. Compos. Part B Eng. 2018 ,143, 172–196. [CrossRef]
23. Karakurt, I.; Lin, L. 3D printing technologies: Techniques, materials, and post-processing. Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 2020 ,
28, 134–143. [CrossRef]
24. Proyavin, M.D.; Kotomina, V .E.; Orlovskiy , A.A.; Zaslavsky , V .Y .; Morozkin, M.V .; Palitsin, A.V .; Rodin, Y .V .; Sobolev , D.I.; Peskov , N.Y .
Application of Chemical Metallization of Photopolymer Structures Additive Technology in the Production of Components for
Electronic Devices. Micromachines 2023 ,14, 1897. [CrossRef]
25. Commission Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 of 14 January 2011 on Plastic Materials and Articles Intended to Come into Contact with
Food. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32011R0010 (accessed on 30 September 2023).
26. EN 71-3+A1:2021-09 ; Safety of Toys–Part 3: Migration of Certain Elements. Polish Committee for Standardization: Warsaw,
Poland, 2021.
27. ISO 11607-1:2019 ; Packaging for Terminally Sterilized Medical Devices—Part 1: Requirements for Materials, Sterile Barrier
Systems and Packaging Systems. ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.
28. ISO 10993-1:2018 ; Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices. ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
29. PN-EN ISO 527-1:2020-01 ; Tworzywa Sztuczne-Oznaczanie Wła´ sciwo´ sci Mechanicznych przy Statycznym Rozci ˛ aganiu-Cz˛ e´ s´ c 1:
Zasady Og ólne. Polish Committee for Standardization: Warsaw, Poland, 2020.
30. PN-EN ISO 527-2:2012 ; Tworzywa sztuczne--Oznaczanie Wła´ sciwo´ sci Mechanicznych Przy Statycznym Rozci ˛ aganiu-Cz˛ e´ s´ c 2:
Warunki Bada ´ n Tworzyw Sztucznych Przeznaczonych do R ó˙znych Technik Formowania. Polish Committee for Standardization:
Warsaw, Poland, 2020.
31. Raj, S.A.; Muthukumaran, E.; Jayakrishna, K. A Case Study of 3D Printed PLA and Its Mechanical Properties. Mater. Today Proc.
2018 ,5, 11219–11226. [CrossRef]
32. ASTM D882 ; Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties. American Society for Testing and Materials: West Conshohocken, PA,
USA, 2018.
33. Karta Techniczna Filament PLA. Available online: https://zadar.pl/pl/p/file/132c0d09a33736b7d9e603d025b13113/PLA-Matte-
TDS.pdf (accessed on 30 April 2021).
34. Noctuo, Karta Produktu PLA. 2020. Available online: https://www.noctuo.pl/#FILAMENT (accessed on 30 April 2021).
35. Miazio, Ł. Badanie wytrzymało´ sci na rozci ˛ aganie pr óbek wydrukowanych w technologii FDM z r ó˙zn ˛ a g˛ esto´ sci ˛ a wypełnienia.
Mechanik 2015 ,7, 533–538. [CrossRef]
36. Picha, T.; Papezova, S.; Picha, S. Evaluation of Relative Permittivity and Loss Factor of 3D Printing Materials for Use in RF
Electronic Applications. Processes 2022 ,10, 1881. [CrossRef]
37. Smith, L.; Patel, R.; White, S. Comparative Outcomes of Home vs. Hospital-Based Care for Chronic Illness Patients. Int. J. Health
Serv. 2017 ,47, 417–428.
38. Thomas, D.; Kumar, P .; Fernandez, R. Patient Outcomes in Home Healthcare Settings: An Analysis of Health Metrics. Glob. Health
Rev. 2016 ,10, 155–165.
39. Rahman, M.; Ahmed, S.; Khan, T. Home-Based Healthcare: Emerging Trends and Impacts on Healthcare Systems in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh Med. J. 2019 ,62, 115–120.


===== PAGE 15 =====
Sensors 2025 ,25, 226 15 of 15
40. Henkemans, O.A.B.; Neerincx, M.A.; Lindenberg, J.; van der Mast, C.A. SuperAssist: A User-Assistant Collaborative Environment
for the supervision of medical instrument use at home. In Proceedings of the 2006 Pervasive Health Conference and Workshops,
Innsbruck, Austria, 29 November–1 December 2006. [CrossRef]
41. Henkemans, O.A.B.; Sawirjo, V .M.; van der Mast, C.A.; Neerincx, M.A.; Lindenberg, J. A computer assistant for remote
collaborative troubleshooting of domestic medical instruments. In Proceedings of the 2008 Second International Conference on
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, Tampere, Finland, 30 January–1 February 2008; pp. 285–288. [CrossRef]
42. Luo, H.; Lamata, P .; Bazin, S.; Bautista, T.; Barclay, N.; Shahmohammadi, M.; Lubrecht, J.M.; Delhaas, T.; Prinzen, F.W. Smartphone
as an electronic stethoscope: Factors influencing heart sound quality. Eur. Heart J.-Digit. Health 2022 ,3, 473–480. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.